PRELIMINARY
Section 1. Short title, commencement and extent.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of January, 1909.
1. This Act has been amended in its application to Assam by Assam Acts 2 of 1941 and 3 of 1953; to Tamil Nadu by
Madras Act 34 of 1950, Madras A.O. 1950, and Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1970; to Punjab by Punjab Act 7 of 1934; to Uttar
Pradesh by U.P. Acts 4 of 1925, 35 of 1948, 24 of 1954, 17 of 1970, 57 of 1976 and 31 of 1978; to Karnataka by Mysore
Act 14 of 1955; to Kerala by Kerala Act 13 of 1957; to Rajasthan by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1958; to Maharashtra by
Maharashtra Acts 22 of 1960 and 25 of 1970; It has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) and, by
notification under ss. 5 and 5A of the Schedule Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), also to the following Scheduled
Districts:—
(1) The district of Jalpaiguri, Cachar (excluding the North Cachar Hills, Goalpara (including the Eastern Duars),
Kamrup, Darrang, Nowgong (excluding the Mikir Hill Tracts) Sibsagar (excluding the Mikir Hill Tracts) and
Lakhimpur (excluding the Dibrugarh Frontier Tracts): Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. 1, p. 5 and gazette of India,
1914, Pt. I, p. 1690.
(2) The District of Darjeeling and the District of Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Palamau and Manbhum in Chota Nagpur:
Calcutta Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 25 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 33.
(3) The Province of Kumaon and Garhwal and the Tarai Parganas (with modifications): U.P. Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 3
and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 31.
(4) The Pargana of Jaunsar-Bawar in Dehradun and the Scheduled portion of the Mirzapur District: U.P. Gazette, 1909,
Pt. I, p. 4 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 32.
(5) Coorg: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 32.
(6) Scheduled Districts in the Punjab: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 33.
(7) Sections 36 to 43 to all the Scheduled Districts in Madras, Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 152.
(8) Scheduled Districts in the C.P., except so much as is already in force and so much as authorizes the
attachment and sale of immovable property in execution of a decree, not being a decree directing the sale of such
property: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 239.
(9) Ajmer-Merwara except ss. 1 and 155 to 158: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. II, p. 480.
(10) Pargana Dhalbhum, the Municipality of Chaibassa in the Kolhan and the Porahat Estate in the
District of Singhbhum: Calcutta, Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 453 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 443.
Under s. 3(3)(a) of the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation (3 of 1872), ss. 38 to 42 and 156 and rules
4 to 9 in Order XXI in the First Schedule have been declared to be in force in the Sonthal Parganas and the
rest of the Code for the trial of suits referred to in s. 10 of the Sonthal Parganas Justice Regulation,
1893 (5 of 1893): see Calcutta, Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 45.
It has been declared to be in force in Panth Piploda by the Panth Piploda Laws Regulation,
1929 (1 of 1929), s. 2; in the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936), s. 3
and Sch. and in the Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch.
It has been extended to the District of Koraput and Ganjam Agency by Orissa Regulation (5 of 1951), s.2.
It has been extended to the State of Manipur (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) by Act 30 of 1950, s. 3 to the whole of the
Union Territory of Lakshadweep (w.e.f. 1-10-1967) by Regulation 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.: to Goa, Daman and
Diu (w.e.f. 15-6-1966) by Act 30 of 1965, s. 3; to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1-7-1965) by Reg. 6 of
1963, s. 2 and Sch. I and to the State of Sikkim (w.e.f. 1-9-1984), vide Notifn. No. S.O. 599 (E),
dated 13-8-1984, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, s. 3.
34
1[(3) It extends to the whole of India except—
2* * * * *
(b) the State of Nagaland and the tribal areas:
Provided that the State Government concerned may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the
provisions of this Code or any of them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas,
as the case may be, with such supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications as may be specified
in the notification.
Explanation.—In this clause, “tribal areas” means the territories which, immediately before the 21st
day of January, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of Assam as referred to in paragraph 20 of the
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.
(4) In relation to the Amindivi Islands, and the East Godavari, West Godavari and Visakhapatnam
Agencies in the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Union Territory of Lakshadweep, the application of this
Code shall be without prejudice to the application of any rule or regulation for the time being in force in such
Islands, Agencies or such Union territory, as the case may be, relating to the application of this Code.]
Section 2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(1) “Code” includes rules;
(2) “decree” means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the Court
expressing it, conclusively determines the rights of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in
controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or final. It shall be deemed to include the rejection
of a plaint and the determination of any question within 3*** section 144, but shall not include—
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an order, or
(b) any order of dismissal for default.
Explanation.—A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before the suit
can be completely disposed of. It is final when such adjudication completely disposes of the suit.
It may be partly preliminary and partly final;
(3) “decree-holder” means any person in whose favour a decree has been passed or an order
capable of execution has been made;
(4) “district” means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction (hereinafter called a “District Court”), and includes the local limits of the ordinary
original civil jurisdiction of a High Court;
4[(5) “foreign Court” means a Court situate outside India and not established or continued by the
authority of the Central Government;]
(6) “foreign judgment” means the judgment of a foreign Court;
(7) “Government Pleader” includes any officer appointed by the State Government to perform all
or any of the functions expressly imposed by this Code on the Government Pleader and also any
pleader acting under the directions of the Government Pleader;
5[(7A) “High Court” in relation to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, means the High Court in
Calcutta;
(7B) “India”, except in sections 1, 29, 43, 44, 6[44A,] 78, 79, 82, 83 and 87A, means the territory
of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir;]
(8) “Judge” means the presiding officer of a Civil Court;
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 2, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Clause (a) omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Sch. (w.e.f. 31-10- 2019).
3. The words and figures “section 47 or” omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 3. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 4, for clause (5) (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
6. Ins. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch. (w.e.f. 23-12-1953).
35
(9) “judgment” means the statement given by the Judge of the grounds of a decree or order;
(10) “judgment-debtor” means any person against whom a decree has been passed or an order
capable of execution has been made;
(11) “legal representative” means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person,
and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is
sued in a representative character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so
suing or sued;
(12) “mesne profits” of property means those profits which the person in wrongful possession of
such property actually received or might with ordinary diligence have received therefrom, together
with interest on such profits, but shall not include profits due to improvements made by the person in
wrongful possession;
(13) “movable property” includes growing crops;
(14) “order” means the formal expression of any decision of a Civil Court which is not a decree;
(15) “pleader” means any person entitled to appear and plead for another in Court, and includes an
advocate, a vakil and an attorney of a High Court;
(16) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules;
(17) “public officer” means a person falling under any of the following descriptions, namely:—
(a) every Judge;
(b) every member of 1[an All-India Service];
(c) every commissioned or gazetted officer in the military 2[naval or air] forces of 3[the Union]
4*** while serving under the Government;
(d) every officer of a court of Justice whose duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on
any matter of law or fact, or to make, authenticate or keep any document, or to take charge or
dispose of any property, or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to
interpret, or to preserve order, in the Court, and every person especially authorised by a court of
Justice to perform any of such duties;
(e) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep any
person in confinement;
(f) every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to give
information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or
convenience;
(g) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property
on behalf of the Government, or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of the
Government, or to execute any revenue process, or to investigate, or to report on, any matter
affecting the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to make, authenticate or keep any document
relating to the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the infraction of any law for the
protection of the pecuniary interests of the Government; and
(h) every officer in the service or pay of the Government, or remunerated by fees or commission
for the performance of any public duty;
(18) “rules” means rules and forms contained in the First Schedule or made under section 122 or
section 125;
(19) “share in a corporation” shall be deemed to include stock, debenture stock, debentures or
bonds; and
(20) “signed”, save in the case of a judgment or decree, includes stamped.
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 3, for “the Indian Civil Service” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch., for “or naval”.
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “his Majesty”.
4. The words “including His Majesty’s Indian Marine Service” omitted by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch.
36
1* * * * *
Section 3. Subordination of Courts.—For the purposes of this Code, the District Court is subordinate to the
High Court, and every Civil Court of a grade inferior to that of a District Court and every Court of Small
Causes is subordinate to the High Court and District Court.
Section 4. Savings.—(1) In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, nothing in this Code shall be
deemed to limit or otherwise affect any special or local law now in force or any special jurisdiction or
power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by or under any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the proposition contained in sub-section (1),
nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any remedy which a landholder or
landlord may have under any law for the time being in force for the recovery of rent of agricultural land
from the produce of such land.
Section 5. Application of the Code to Revenue Courts.—(1) Where any Revenue Courts are governed by
the provisions of this Code in those matters of procedure upon which any special enactment applicable to
them is silent, the State Government 2*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any
portions of those provisions which are not expressly made applicable by this Code shall not apply to those
Courts, or shall only apply to them with such modifications as the State Government 3*** may prescribe.
(2) “Revenue Court” in sub-section (1) means a Court having jurisdiction under any local law to
entertain suits or other proceedings relating to the rent, revenue or profits of land used for
agricultural purposes, but does not include a Civil Court having original jurisdiction under this Code
to try such suits or proceedings as being suits or proceedings of a civil nature.
Section 6. Pecuniary jurisdiction.—Save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided, nothing herein
contained shall operate to give any Court jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subject-matter
of which exceeds the pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary jurisdiction.
Section 7. Provincial Small Cause Courts.—The following provisions shall not extend to Courts
constituted under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887) 4[or under the Berar Small
Cause Courts Law, 1905], or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes 5[under the
said Act or Law], 6[or to Courts in 7[any part of India to which the said Act does not extend] exercising a
corresponding jurisdiction] that is to say,—
(a) so much of the body of the Code as relates to—
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes;
(ii) the execution of decrees in such suits;
(iii) the execution of decrees against immovable property; and
(b) the following sections, that is to say,—
section 9,
sections 91 and 92,
sections 94 and 95 8[so far as they authorize or relate to—
(i) orders for the attachment of immovable property,
(ii) injunctions,
(iii) the appointment of a receiver of immovable property, or
(iv) the interlocutory orders referred to in clause (e) of section 94], and sections 96 to 112
and 115.
1. Clause (21) omitted by Act 2 of 1951, s. 4, earlier clause (21) ins. by the A.O. 1950.
2. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C”, omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Sch. Pt. I.
3. The words “with the sanction aforesaid” omitted by s. 2 and the First Sch. Pt. I, ibid.
4. Ins. by Act 4 of 1941, s. 2 and the Third Sch.
5. Subs. by s. 2 and the Third Sch., ibid., for “under that Act”.
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 1926, s. 3, for “so far as they relate to injunctions and interlocutory orders” .
37
Section 8. Presidency Small Cause Courts.—Save as provided in sections 24, 38 to 41, 75, clauses (a), (b)
and (c), 76, 1[77, 157 and 158], and by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882), the
provisions in the body of this Code shall not extend to any suit or proceeding in any Court of Small
Causes established in the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay:
2[Provided that—
(1) the High Courts of Judicature at Fort William, Madras and Bombay, as the case may be, may
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct3 that any such provisions not
inconsistent with the express provisions of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882),
and with such modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification, shall extend to suits
or proceedings or any class of suits or proceedings in such Court;
(2) all rules heretofore made by any of the said High Courts under section 9 of the Presidency
Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882) shall be deemed to have been validly made.]
PART I
SUITS IN GENERAL
Jurisdiction of The Courts and res judicata
Section 9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred.—The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein
contained) have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is
either expressly or impliedly barred.
4[Explanation I].—A suit in which the right to property or to an office is contested is a suit of a civil
nature, notwithstanding that such right may depend entirely on the decision of questions as to religious
rites or ceremonies.
5[Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, it is immaterial whether or not any fees are attached
to the office referred to in Explanation I or whether or not such office is attached to a particular place.]
STATE AMENDMENTS
Maharashtra.—
Section 9A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in its application to the State of Maharashtra
(hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), shall be deleted.
[Vide Maharashtra Act 61 of 2018, sec. 2.]
Notwithstanding the deletion of section 9A of the principal Act,—
(1) where consideration of a preliminary issue framed under section 9A is pending on the date of
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018 (hereinafter, in this
section, referred to as “the Amendment Act”), the said issue shall be deemed to be an issue framed under
Order XIV of the principal Act and shall be decided by the Court, as it deems fit, along with all other
issues, at the time of final disposal of the suit itself :
Provided that, the evidence, if any, led by any party or parties to the suit, on the preliminary issue so
framed under section 9A, shall be considered by the Court along with evidence, if any, led on other issues
in the suit, at the time of final disposal of the suit itself ;
(2) in all the cases, where a preliminary issue framed under section 9A has been decided, holding that
the Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit, and a challenge to such decision is pending before a
revisional Court, on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, such revisional proceedings shall
stand abated :
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 4, for “77 and 155 to 158” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Added by Act 1 of 1914, s. 2.
3. For instance of such direction, see Calcutta Gazette, 1910, Pt. I, p. 814.
4. Explanation renumbered as Explanation I thereof by Act 104 of 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
38
Provided that, where a decree in such suit is appealed from any error, defect or irregularity in the order
upholding jurisdiction shall be treated as one of the ground of objection in the memorandum of appeal as
if it had been included in such memorandum;
(3) in all cases, where a preliminary issue framed under section 9A has been decided, holding that the
Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, and a challenge to such decision is pending before an
appellate or revisional Court, on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, such appellate or
revisional proceedings shall continue as if the Amendment Act has not been enacted and section 9A has
not been deleted :
Provided that, in case the appellate or revisional Court, while partly allowing such appeal or revision,
remands the matter to the trial Court for reconsideration of the preliminary issue so framed under
section 9A, upon receipt of these proceedings by the trial Court, all the provisions of the principal Act
shall apply ;
(4) in all cases, where an order granting an ad-interim relief has been passed under sub-section (2) of
section 9A prior to its deletion, such order shall be deemed to be an ad-interim order made under Order
XXXIX of the principal Act and the Court shall, at the time of deciding the application in which such an
order is made, either confirm or vacate or modify such order.
[Vide Maharashtra Act 61 of 2018, sec. 3.]
Maharashtra.—
In section 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018, for clause (1), the
following clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from 27th
June 2018, being the date of commencement of the said Act, namely:—
“(1) where consideration of a preliminary issue framed under section 9A is pending on the date of
commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Act, 2018 (hereinafter, in this
section, referred to as “the Amendment Act”), the said issue shall be decided and disposed of by the Court
under section 9A, as if the said section 9A has not been deleted;”.
[Vide Maharashtra Act 72 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-6-2018.)]
Section 10. Stay of suit.—No Court shall proceed with the trial of any suit in which the matter in issue is also
directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between the same parties, or between
parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating under the same title where such suit is pending in
the same or any other Court in 1[India] have jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in any Court
beyond the limits of 1[India] established or continued by 2[the Central Government 3***.] and having like
jurisdiction, or before 4[the Supreme Court].
Explanation.—The pendency of a suit in a foreign Court does not preclude the Courts in 1[India] from
trying a suit founded on the same cause of action.
Section 11. Res judicata.—No Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially
in issue has been directly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties, or between
parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, in a Court competent to try
such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been subsequently raised, and has been heard and
finally decided by such Court.
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G.G. in C”.
3. The words “or the Crown Representative” omitted by the A.O. 1948.
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “His Majesty in Council”.
39
Explanation I.—The expression “former suit” shall denote a suit which has been decided prior to a suit
in question whether or not it was instituted prior thereto.
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, the competence of a Court shall be determined
irrespective of any provisions as to a right of appeal from the decision of such Court.
Explanation III.—The matter above referred to must in the former suit have been alleged by one party
and either denied or admitted, expressly or impliedly, by the other.
Explanation IV.—Any matter which might and ought to have been made ground of defence or attack
in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantially in issue in such suit.
Explanation V.—Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly granted by the decree, shall
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to have been refused.
Explanation VI.—Where persons litigate bona fide in respect of a public right or of a private right
claimed in common for themselves and others, all persons interested in such right shall, for the purposes
of this section, be deemed to claim under the persons so litigating.
1[Explanation VII.—The provisions of this section shall apply to a proceeding for the execution of a decree
and references in this section to any suit, issue or former suit shall be construed as references, respectively, to a
proceeding for the execution of the decree, question arising in such proceeding and a former proceeding for the
execution of that decree.
Explanation VIII.—An issue heard and finally decided by a Court of limited jurisdiction, competent to
decide such issue, shall operate as res judicata in a subsequent suit, notwithstanding that such Court of
limited jurisdiction was not competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been
subsequently raised.]
Section 12. Bar to further suit.—Where a plaintiff is precluded by rules from instituting a further suit in
respect of any particular cause of action, he shall not be entitled to institute a suit in respect of such cause
of action in any Court to which this Code applies.
Section 13. When foreign judgment not conclusive.—A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any
matter thereby directly adjudicated upon between the same parties or between parties under whom they or
any of them claim litigating under the same title except—
(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction;
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an incorrect view of
international law or a refusal to recognise the law of 2[India] in cases in which such law is applicable;
(d) where the proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural justice;
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud;
(f) where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in 2[India].
Section 14. Presumption as to foreign judgments.—The Court shall presume upon the production of any
document purporting to be a certified copy of a foreign judgment, that such judgment was pronounced by
a Court of competent jurisdiction, unless the contrary appears on the record; but such presumption may be
displaced by proving want of jurisdiction.
Place of Suing
Section 15. Court in which suits to be instituted.—Every suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest
grade competent to try it.
Section 16. Suits to be instituted where subject-matter situate.—Subject to the pecuniary or other
limitations prescribed by any law, suits—
(a) for the recovery of immovable property with or without rent or profits,
(b) for the partition of immovable property,
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
40
(c) for foreclosure, sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of or charge upon immovable
property,
(d) or the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property,
(e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property,
(f) for the recovery of movable property actually under distraint or attachment,
shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate:
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property
held by or on behalf of the defendant may, where the relief sought can be entirely obtained through his
personal obedience, be instituted either in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
property is situate, or in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and
voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain.
Explanation.—In this section “property” means property situate in 1[India].
Section 17. Suits for immovable property situate within jurisdiction of different Courts.—Where a suit is to
obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property situate within the jurisdiction of
different Courts, the suit may be instituted in any Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any
portion of the property is situate:
Provided that, in respect of the value of the subject-matter of the suit, the entire claim is cognizable
by such Court.
18. Place of Institution of suit where local limits of jurisdiction of Courts are
uncertain.—(1) Where it is alleged to be uncertain within the local limits of the jurisdiction of which of
two or more Courts, any immovable property is situate, any one of those Courts may, if satisfied that
there is ground for the alleged uncertainty, record a statement to that effect and thereupon proceed to
entertain and dispose of any suit relating to that property, and its decree in the suit shall have the same
effect as if the property were situate within the local limits of its jurisdiction:
Provided that the suit is one with respect to which the Court is competent as regards the nature and
value of the suit to exercise jurisdiction.
(2) Where a statement has not been recorded under sub-section (1), and an objection is taken before
an Appellate or Revisional Court that a decree or order in a suit relating to such property was made by a
Court not having jurisdiction where the property is situate, the Appellate or Revisional Court shall not
allow the objection unless in its opinion there was, at the time of the institution of the suit, no reasonable
ground for uncertainty as to the court having jurisdiction with respect thereto and there has been a
consequent failure of justice.
Section 19. Suits for compensation for wrongs to person or movables.—Where a suit is for compensation for
wrong done to the person or to movable property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of one Court and the defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within
the local limits of the jurisdiction of another Court, the suit may be instituted at the option of the plaintiff in
either of the said Courts.
Illustrations
(a) A, residing in Delhi, beats B in Calcutta. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in Delhi.
(b) A, residing in Delhi, publishes in Calcutta statements defamatory of B. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in
Delhi.
Section 20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of action arises.—Subject to
the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction—
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at the time of the
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally
works for gain; or
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the commencement of the
suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided that
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
41
in such case either the leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on
business, or personally works for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
1* * * * *
2[Explanation].—A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office
in 3[India] or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate
office, at such place.
Illustrations
(a) A is a tradesman in Calcutta, B carries on business in Delhi. B, by his agent in Calcutta, buys goods of A and
requests A to deliver them to the East Indian Railway Company. A delivers the goods accordingly in Calcutta. A
may sue B for the price of the goods either in Calcutta, where the cause of action has arisen, or in Delhi, where B
carries on business.
(b) A resides at Simla, B at Calcutta and C at Delhi. A, B and C being together at Benaras, B and C make a joint
promissory note payable on demand, and deliver it to A. A may sue B and C at Benaras, where the cause of action
arose. He may also sue them at Calcutta, where B resides, or at Delhi, where C resides; but in each of these cases, if
the non-resident defendant objects, the suit cannot proceed without the leave of the Court.
Section 21. Objections to jurisdiction.—4[(1)] No objection as to the place of suing shall be allowed by any
Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest
possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement, and unless there
has been a consequent failure of justice.
5[(2) No objection as to the competence of a Court with reference to the pecuniary limits of its
jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the
Court of first instance at the earliest possible opportunity, and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or
before such settlement, and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice.
(3) No objection as to the competence of the executing Court with reference to the local limits of its
jurisdiction shall be allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the
executing Court at the earliest possible opportunity, and unless there has been a consequent failure of
justice.]
Section 21A. Bar on suit to set aside decree on objection as to place of suing.—No suit shall lie
challenging the validity of a decree passed in a former suit between the same parties, or between the
parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, on any ground based on an
objection as to the place of suing.
Explanation.—The expression “former suit” means a suit which has been decided prior to the decision
in the suit in which the validity of the decree is questioned, whether or not the previously decided suit was
instituted prior to the suit in which the validity of such decree is questioned.]
Section 22. Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one Court.—Where a suit may
be instituted in any one of two or more Courts and is instituted in one of such Courts, any defendant, after
notice to the other parties, may, at the earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are
settled at or before such settlement, apply to have the suit transferred to another Court, and the Court to
which such application is made, after considering the objections of the other parties (if any), shall
determine in which of the several Courts having jurisdiction the suit shall proceed.
1. Explanation 1 omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Explanation II” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
4. S. 21 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
6. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
42
Section 23. To what Court application lies.—(I) Where the several Courts having jurisdiction are subordinate to
the same Appellate Court, an application under section 22 shall be made to the Appellate Court.
(2) Where such Courts are subordinate to different Appellate Courts but to the same High Court, the
application shall be made to the said High Court.
(3) Where such Courts are subordinate to different High Courts, the application shall be made to the
High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Court in which the suit is brought is situate.
Section 24. General power of transfer and withdrawal.—(1) On the application of any of the parties and
after notice to the parties and after hearing such of them as desired to be heard, or of its own motion
without such notice, the High Court or the District Court may at any stage—
(a) transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for trial or disposal to any
Court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the same, or
(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in any Court subordinate to it, and—
(i) try or dispose of the same; or
(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and competent to
try or dispose of the same; or
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the Court from which it was withdrawn.
(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn under sub-section (1), the Court
which 1[is thereafter to try or dispose of such suit or proceeding] may, subject to any special directions in the
case of an order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the point at which it was transferred or
withdrawn.
2[(3) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) Courts of Additional and Assistant Judges shall be deemed to be subordinate to the
District Court;
(b) “proceeding” includes a proceeding for the execution of a decree or order.]
(4) The Court trying any suit transferred or withdrawn under this section from a Court of Small Causes
shall, for the purposes of such suit, be deemed to be a Court of Small Causes.
3[(5) A suit or proceeding may be transferred under this section from a Court which has no jurisdiction
to try it.]
Section 25. Power of Supreme Court to transfer suits, etc.—(1) On the application of a party, and after notice
to the parties, and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, the Supreme Court may, at any stage, if
satisfied that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, direct that any suit, appeal or other
proceeding be transferred from a High Court or other Civil Court in one State to a High Court or other Civil
Court in any other State.
(2) Every application under this section shall be made by a motion which shall be supported by an
affidavit.
(3) The Court to which such suit, appeal or other proceeding is transferred shall, subject to any special
directions in the order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the stage at which it was transferred to it.
(4) In dismissing any application under this section, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the
application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person
who has opposed the application such sum, not exceeding two thousand rupees, as it considers
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
(5) The law applicable to any suit, appeal or other proceeding transferred under this section shall be
the law which the Court in which the suit, appeal or other proceeding was originally instituted ought to
have applied to such suit, appeal or proceeding.]
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 10, for “thereafter tries such suit” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
43
Institution of suits
26. Institution of suits. — 1[(1)] Every suit shall be instituted by the presentation of a plaint or in such
other manner as may be prescribed.
2[(2) In every plaint, facts shall be proved by affidavit.]
*[Provided that such an affidavit shall be in the form and manner as prescribed under Order VI of
Rule 15A.]
Summons and discovery
Section 27. Summons to defendants.—Where a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the
defendant to appear and answer the claim and may be served in manner prescribed 3[on such day not
beyond thirty days from date of the institution of the suit.]
Section 28. Service of summons where defendant resides in another State.—(1) A summons may be sent for
service in another State to such Court and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that State.
(2) The Court to which such summons is sent shall, upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been
issued by such Court and shall then return the summons to the Court of issue together with the record
(if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto.
4[(3) Where the language of the summons sent for service in another State is different from the
language of the record referred to in sub-section (2), a translation of the record,—
(a) in Hindi, where the language of the Court issuing the summons is Hindi, or
(b) in Hindi or English where the language of such record is other than Hindi or English,
shall also be sent together with the record sent under that sub-section.]
Section 29. Service of foreign summonses.—Summonses and other processes issued by—
(a) any Civil or Revenue Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this
Code do not extend, or
(b) any Civil or Revenue Court established or continued by the authority of the Central
Government outside India, or
(c) any other Civil or Revenue Court outside India to which the Central Government has, by
notification……………………………… in the Official Gazette, declared the provisions of this
section to apply,
may be sent to the Courts in the territories to which this Code extends, and served as if they were
summonses issued by such Courts.]
Section 30. Power to order discovery and the like.—Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
prescribed, the Court may, at any time, either of its own motion or on the application of any party,—
(a) make such orders as may be necessary or reasonable in all matters relating to the delivery and
answering of interrogatories, the admission of documents and facts, and the discovery, inspection,
production, impounding and return of documents or other material objects producible as evidence;
(b) issue summonses to persons whose attendance is required either to give evidence or to
produce documents or such other objects as aforesaid;
(c) order any fact to be proved by affidavit.
Section 31. Summons to witness.—The provisions in sections 27, 28 and 29 shall apply to summonses to give
evidence or to produce documents or other material objects.
Section 32. Penalty for default.—The Court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons
has been issued under section 30 and for that purpose may—
(a) issue a warrant for his arrest;
(b) attach and sell his property;
1. S. 26 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act 46 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
4. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1-5-1977).
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 6, for s. 29 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
* Ins. by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and Sch., Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value (w.e.f. 23-10-2015).
44
(c) impose a fine upon him 1[not exceeding five thousand rupees];
(d) order him to furnish security for his appearance and in default commit him to the civil prison.
Judgment and decree
Section 33. Judgment and decree.—The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment, and on
such judgment a decree shall follow.
Interest
Section 34. Interest.—(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the Court may, in the decree,
order interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged, from the date of
the suit to the date of the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to
the institution of the suit, 2[with further interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. per annum as the Court
deems reasonable on such principal sum], from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date
as the Court thinks fit:
3[Provided that where the liability in relation to the sum so adjudged had arisen out of a commercial
transaction, the rate of such further interest may exceed six per cent. per annum, but shall not exceed the
contractual rate of interest or where there is no contractual rate, the rate at which moneys are lent or advanced
by nationalised banks in relation to commercial transactions.
Explanation I.—In this sub-section, “nationalised bank” means a corresponding new bank as defined in
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970).
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, a transaction is a commercial transaction, if it is
connected with the industry, trade or business of the party incurring the liability.]
(2) Where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further interest 4[on such principal sum]
from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other earlier date, the Court shall be deemed to have
refused such interest, and a separate suit therefor shall not lie.
Costs
Section 35. Costs.—(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of any
law for the time being in force, the costs of and incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court, and the
Court shall have full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be
paid, and to give all necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction to
try the suit shall be no bar to the exercise of such powers.
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall state its reasons in
writing.
5* * * * *
*[35. Costs.— (1) In relation to any Commercial dispute, the Court, notwithstanding anything contained
in any other law for the time being in force or Rule, has the discretion to determine:
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;
(b) the quantum of those costs; and
(c) when they are to be paid.
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 4, for “not exceeding five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).`
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
3. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1-7-1977).
4. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 2, for “on such aggregate sum as aforesaid” (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
5. Sub-section (3) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
* Subs. by Act 4 of 2016, s. 16 and Sch., Shall be applicable to commercial disputes of a specified value (w.e.f. 23-10-2015).
45
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (a), the expression “costs” shall mean reasonable costs
relating to—
(i) the fees and expenses of the witnesses incurred;
(ii) legal fees and expenses incurred;
(iii) any other expenses incurred in connection with the proceedings.
(2) If the Court decides to make an order for payment of costs, the general rule is that the unsuccessful
party shall be ordered to pay the costs of the successful party:
Provided that the Court may make an order deviating from the general rule for reasons to be recorded in
writing.
Illustration
The Plaintiff, in his suit, seeks a money decree for breach of contract, and damages. The Court holds that the
Plaintiff is entitled to the money decree. However, it returns a finding that the claim for damages is frivolous and
vexatious.
In such circumstances the Court may impose costs on the Plaintiff, despite the Plaintiff being the successful
party, for having raised frivolous claims for damages.
(3) In making an order for the payment of costs, the Court shall have regard to the following circumstances,
including—
(a) the conduct of the parties;
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that party has not been wholly successful;
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counter-claim leading to delay in the disposal of the case;
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle is made by a party and unreasonably refused by the other party;
and
(e) whether the party had made a frivolous claim and instituted a vexatious proceeding wasting the time of
the Court.
(4) The orders which the Court may make under this provision include an order that a party must pay––
(a) a proportion of another party’s costs;
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs;
(c) costs from or until a certain date;
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;
(f) costs relating to a distinct part of the proceedings; and
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.]
STATE AMENDMENTS
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).—
In Section 35, in sub-section (1) omit “Commercial”.
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of
Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].
46
Section 35A. Compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences.—(1) If in any suit
or other proceedings 2[including an execution proceeding but 3[excluding an appeal or a revision]] any
party objects to the claim or defence on the ground that the claim or defence or any part of it is, as against
the objector, false or vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it has been put forward, and if
thereafter, as against the objector, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole
or in part, the Court, 4[if it so thinks fit], may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or
defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for the payment to the object or by the party by whom
such claim or defence has been put forward, of cost by way of compensation.
*[(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding 5[three thousand
rupees] or exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction, whichever amount is less:
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the jurisdiction of a
Court of Small Causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887), 6[or under a
corresponding law in force in 7[any part of India to which the said Act does not extend]] and not being a Court
constituted 8[under such Act or law], are less than two hundred and fifty rupees, the High Court may empower
such Court to award as costs under this section any amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not
exceeding those limits by more than one hundred rupees:
Provided, further, that the High Court may limit the amount which any Court or class of Courts is
empowered to award as costs under this section.]
(3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason thereof, be
exempted from any criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence made by him.
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded under this section in respect of a false or vexatious
claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages or compensation in
respect of such claim or defence.]
STATE AMENDMENTS
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).—
In Section 35A, omit sub-section (2).
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of
Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020)].
Uttar Pradesh
Amendment of section 35-A of Act V of 1908.—In the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act) in section 35-A, after
sub- section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :—
“Revision.—(1-A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall mutatis mutandis apply to an
appeal where the appellate court confirms the decision of the trial court and the trial
court has not awarded, or has awarded insufficient, compensatory cost under that sub-
section.”
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 2]
1. S. 35A ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 2, which, under section 1(2) thereof may be brought into force in any State by the State
Government on any specified date. It has been so brought into force in Bombay, Bengal, U.P., Punjab, Bihar, C.P., Assam,
Orissa and Madras.
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 4, for “not being an appeal” (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 14, for “excluding an appeal” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 14, for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “a Part B State”.
8. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 7, for “under that Act” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
* Sub-section (2) of section 35(A), shall be omitted in its application to commercial disputes of a specified value, vide Act 4 of
2016, s. 16 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015).
47
Uttar Pradesh
Section 35-A or Schedule of the Act.—(1) For the existing sub-section (1), the following
shall be substituted ;
“(1) If in any suit or other proceeding, including proceedings in execution, but not being
an appeal or revision, the court finds that the claim or defense or any part thereof is false or
vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it has been put forward and if such claim
or defense or such part is disallowed abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in part, the court
may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or defense to be false or vexatious, make
an order for the payment to the successful party of costs by way of compensation irrespective
of the decision on other issues in the case.”
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XXIV of 1954, s. 3]
Section 35B. Costs for causing delay.—(1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for taking any
step therein, a party to the suit—
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this Code to take on that date, or
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence or on any other ground,
the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order requiring such party to pay to the other party
such costs as would, in the opinion of the Court, be reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party in
respect of the expenses incurred by him in attending the Court on that date, and payment of such costs, on
the date next following the date of such order, shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution
of—
(a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such costs,
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the defendent was ordered to pay such costs.
Explanation.—Where separate defences have been raised by the defendant or groups of defendants,
payment of such costs shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution of the defence by such
defendants or groups of defendants as have been ordered by the Court to pay such costs.
(2) The costs, ordered to be paid under sub-section (1), shall not, if paid, be included in the costs
awarded in the decree passed in the suit; but, if such costs are not paid, a separate order shall be drawn up
indicating the amount of such costs and the names and addresses of the persons by whom such costs are
payable and the order so drawn up shall be executable against such persons.]
PART II
EXECUTION
General
Section 36. Application to orders.—The provisions of this Code relating to the execution of decrees
(including provisions relating to payment under a decree) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed
to apply to the execution of orders (including payment under an order).]
Section 37. Definition of Court which passed a decree.—The expression “Court which passed a decree,”
or words to that effect, shall, in relation to the execution of decrees, unless there is anything repugnant in
the subject or context, be deemed to include,—
(a) where the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, the
Court of first instance, and
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for section 36 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
48
(b) where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have jurisdiction to execute it, the
Court which, if the suit wherein the decree was passed was instituted at the time of making the
application for the execution of the decree, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.
1[Explanation.—The Court of first instance does not cease to have jurisdiction to execute a decree
merely on the ground that after the institution of the suit wherein the decree was passed or after the passing
of the decree, any area has been transferred from the jurisdiction of that Court to the jurisdiction of any other
Court; but, in every such case, such other Court shall also have jurisdiction to execute the decree, if at the
time of making the application for execution of the decree it would have jurisdiction to try the said suit.]
Courts by which decrees may be executed
Section 38. Court by which decree may be executed.—A decree may be executed either by the Court which
passed it, or by the Court to which it is sent for execution.
Section 39. Transfer of decree.—(1) The Court which passed a decree may, on the application of the
decree-holder, send it for execution to another Court 2[of competent jurisdiction],—
(a) if the person against whom the decree is passed actually and voluntarily resides or carries on
business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or
(b) if such person has not property within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court which
passed the decree sufficient to satisfy such decree and has property within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of such other Court, or
(c) if the decree directs the sale or delivery of immovable property situate outside the local limits
of the jurisdiction of the Court which passed it, or
(d) if the Court which passed the decree considers for any other reason, which it shall record in
writing, that the decree should be executed by such other Court.
(2) The Court which passed a decree may of its own motion send it for execution to any subordinate
Court of competent jurisdiction.
2[(3) For the purposes of this section, a Court shall be deemed to be a Court of competent jurisdiction if, at
the time of making the application for the transfer of decree to it, such Court would have jurisdiction to try the
suit in which such decree was passed.]
3[(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the Court which passed a decree to execute
such decree against any person or property outside the local limits of its jurisdiction.]
STATE AMENDMENT
Uttar Pradesh
Amendment of section 39 of Act no. 5 of 1908.— In section 39 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, hereinafter referred to as the said Code, for sub-section (3), the
following sub- section shall be substituted, namely :—
“(3) For the purposes of this section, a Court shall be deemed to be a Court of
competent jurisdiction of the amount or value of the subject-matter of the suit wherein
the decree was passed does not exceed the pecuniary limits, if any, of its ordinary
jurisdiction at the time of making the application for the transfer of decree to it,
notwithstanding that it had otherwise no jurisdiction to try the suit.”
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 31 of 1978, s. 2]
Section 40. Transfer of decree to Court in another State.—Where a decree is sent for execution in another State, it
shall be sent to such Court and executed in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that State.
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
49
Section 41. Result of execution proceedings to be certified.—The Court to which a decree is sent for
execution shall certify to the Court which passed it the fact of such execution, or where the former Court
fails to execute the same the circumstances attending such failure.
42. Powers of Court in executing transferred decree. — 1[(1)] The Court executing a decree sent to it shall
have the same powers in executing such decree as if it had been passed by itself. All persons is disobeying
or obstructing the execution of the decree shall be punishable by such Court in the same manner as if it had
passed the decree. And its order in executing such decree shall be subject to the same rules in respect of
appeal as if the decree had passed by itself.
2[(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the powers of the Court
under that sub-section shall include the following powers of the Court which passed the decree, namely:—
(a) power to send the decree for execution to another Court under section 39;
(b) power to execute the decree against the legal representative of the deceased judgment-debtor
under section 50;
(c) power to order attachment of a decree.
(3) A Court passing an order in exercise of the powers specified in sub-section (2) shall send a copy
thereof to the Court which passed the decree.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer on the Court to which a decree is sent for
execution any of the following powers, namely:—
(a) power to order execution at the instance of the transferee of the decree;
(b) in the case of a decree passed against a firm, power to grant leave to execute such decree
against any person, other than such a person as is referred to in clause (b), or clause (c) of
sub-rule (1) of rule 50 of Order XXI. ]
STATE AMENDMENT
Uttar Pradesh
Substitution of new section for section 42 of Act V of 1908.— For section 42 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh (hereinafter
referred to as the said Code) the following section shall be substituted and be deemed
to have been substituted with affect from December 2, 1968, namely :—
“42. Power of court in executing transferred decree.— (1) The Court executing a decree
sent to it shall have the same powers in executing such decree as if it had been passed by
itself. All persons disobeying or obstructing the execution of the decree shall be punishable by
such Court in the same manner as if it had passed the decree, and its order in executing such
decree shall be subject to the same rules in respect of appeal as if the decree had been passed by itself.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub- section (1), the powers of the
Court under that sub-section shall include the following powers of the Court which passed the
decree, namely —
(a) power to send the decree for execution to another Court under section 39 ;
(b) power to execute the decree against the legal representative of the deceased
judgment-debtor under section 50 ;
(c) power to order attachment of a decree;
(d) power to decide any question relating to the bar of limitation to the
executability of the decree ;
(e) power to record payment or adjustment under rule 2 of Order XXI;
1. S. 42 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Ins. by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
50
(f) power to order stay of execution under rule 29 of Order XXI;
(g) in the case of a decree passed against a firm, power to grant leave to execute such decree
against any person other than a person as is referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-rule (1) of
rule 50 of Order XXI.
(3) A Court passing an order in exercise of the powers specified in sub-section (2)
shall send a copy thereof to the Court which passed the decree.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer on the Court to which a decree is sent for
execution, the power to order execution at the instance of the transferee of a decree.”
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1970, s. 2]
Section 43. Execution of decrees passed by Civil Courts in places to which this Code does not extend.—
Any decree passed by any Civil Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do
not extend, or by any Court established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India,
may, if it cannot be executed within the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, be executed in the
manner herein provided within the jurisdiction of any Court in the territories to which this Code extends.]
2[44. Execution of decrees passed by Revenue Courts in places to which this Code does not
extend.—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the decrees of
any Revenue Court in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend, or any class of
such decrees, may be executed in the State as if they had been passed by Courts in that State.]
Section 44A. Execution of decrees passed by Courts in reciprocating territory.—(1) Where a certified
copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of 4*** any reciprocating territory has been filed in a
District Court, the decree may be executed in 5[India] as if it had been passed by the District Court.
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a certificate from such superior Court
stating the extent, if any, to which the decree has been satisfied or adjusted and such certificate shall, for the
purposes of proceedings under this section, be conclusive proof of the extent of such satisfaction or
adjustment.
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified copy of the decree apply to the
proceedings of a District Court executing a decree under this section, and the District Court shall refuse
execution of any such decree, if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the decree falls within any
of the exceptions specified in clauses (a) to (f) of section 13.
6[Explanation 1.—“Reciprocating territory” means any country or territory outside India which the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a reciprocating territory for
the purposes of this section; and “superior Courts”, with reference to any such territory, means such
Courts as may be specified in the said notification.
Explanation 2.—“Decree” with reference to a superior Court means any decree or judgment of such
Court under which a sum of money is payable, not being a sum payable in respect of taxes or other
charges of a like nature or in respect of a fine or other penalty, but shall in no case include an arbitration
award, even if such an award is enforceable as a decree or judgment.]]
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 8, for s. 43 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for s. 44 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1937, s. 2.
4. The words “the United Kingdom or” omitted by Act 71 of 1952, s. 2.
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
6. Subs. by Act 71 of 1952, s. 2, for Explanations 1 to 3.
51
Section 45. Execution of decrees outside India.—So much of the foregoing sections of this Part as
empowers a Court to send a decree for execution to another Court shall be construed as empowering a
Court in any State to send a decree for execution to any Court established 2*** by the authority of the
Central Government 3[outside India] to which the State Government has by notification in the Official
Gazette declared this section to apply.]
Section 46. Precepts.—(1) Upon the application of the decree-holder the Court which passed the decree may,
whenever it thinks fit, issue a precept to any other Court which would be competent to execute such
decree to attach any property belonging to the judgment-debtor and specified in the precept.
(2) The Court to which a precept is sent shall proceed to attach the property in the manner prescribed
in regard to the attachment of property in execution of a decree:
Provided that no attachment under a precept shall continue for more than two months unless the
period of attachment is extended by an order of the Court which passed the decree or unless before the
determination of such attachment the decree has been transferred to the Court by which the attachment
has been made and the decree-holder has applied for an order for the sale of such property.
Questions to be determined by Court executing decree
Section 47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree.—(1) All questions arising between
the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the
execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree
and not by a separate suit.
4* * * * *
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the representative of a party, such
question shall, for the purposes of this section, be determined by the Court.
5[Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed and a
defendant against whom a suit has been dismissed are parties to the suit.
Explanation II.—(a) For the purposes of this section, a purchaser of property at a sale in execution of a
decree shall be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and
(b) all questions relating to the delivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or his
representative shall be deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree
within the meaning of this section.]
STATE AMENDMENT
Uttar Pradesh
Amendment of section 47.— In section 47 of the principal Act, Explanation II
inserted by the U. P. Civil Laws (Reforms and Amendment) Act, 1954, shall be omitted.
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 3]
Limit of time for execution
48. [Execution barred in certain cases.] Rep. by the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), s. 28 (w.e.f. 1-1-1964).
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for s. 45.
2. The words “or continued” omitted by the A.O. 1948.
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “in any Indian State”.
4. Sub-section (2) omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5. Subs. by s. 20, ibid. for the Explanation (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
52
STATE AMENDMENT
Rajasthan
Insertion of new section 48 A.- After section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908),
in its application thereof to the State of Rajasthan, the following new section shall be, and be deemed always to
have been inserted, namely:--
"48-A- Varied application of section 48.- For the purposes of the application of section 48 to the
State of Rajasthan;-
(i) a decree, made before the twenty-fifth day of January, 1950, in those parts of Rajasthan
where a corresponding provision did not then exist, shall, unless it shall have becomr time-barred
or otherwise infructuous before the said day in accordance with any law then prevailing in those
parts, be deemed to have been made on the said day, and
(ii) Where a decree might have been made before the twenty-fifth day of January, 1950 in
those parts of Rajasthan where a corresponding provision then existed, with a period longer than
twelve years provided therein such longer period or the period of twelve years form the said day
whichever expires first shall be the period after which, according to section 48, no order for
execution shall be made".
[Vide Rajasthan Act XX of 1952, s. 2]
Transferees and legal representatives
Section 49. Transferee.—Every transferee of a decree shall hold the same subject to the equities (if any) which the
judgment-debtor might have enforced against the original decree-holder.
Section 50. Legal representative.—(1) Where a judgment-debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied, the
holder of the decree may apply to the Court which passed it to execute the same against the legal representative of
the deceased.
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representative, he shall be liable only to the extent of the
property of the deceased which has come to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and, for the purpose of
ascertaining such liability, the Court executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the application of the
decree-holder, compel such legal representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit.
Procedure in execution
Section 51. Powers of Court to enforce execution.—Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed,
the Court may, on the application of the decree-holder, order execution of the decree—
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed;
(b) by attachment and sale or by the sale without attachment of any property;
(c) by arrest and detention in prison 1[for such period not exceeding the period specified in section 58,
where arrest and detention is permissible under that section];
(d) by appointing a receiver; or
(e) in such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require:
2[Provided that, where the decree is for the payment of money, execution by detention in prison shall not be
ordered unless, after giving the judgment-debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be committed
to prison, the Court, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied—
(a) that the judgment-debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or delaying the execution of the
decree,—
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or
(ii) has, after the institution of the suit in which the decree was passed, dishonestly transferred,
concealed, or removed any part of his property, or committed any other act of bad faith in relation to
his property, or
(b) that the judgment-debtor has, or has had since the date of the decree, the means to pay the amount
of the decree or some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or neglected to pay the
same, or
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment-debtor was bound in a fiduciary capacity to
account.
Explanation.—In the calculation of the means of the judgment-debtor for the purposes of clause (b), there
shall be left out of account any property which, by or under any law or custom having the force of law for the
time being in force, is exempt from attachment in execution of the decree.]
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1936, s. 2.
53
Section 52. Enforcement of decree against legal representative.—(1) Where a decree is passed against a party as the legal
representative of a deceased person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property of the deceased, it may be
executed by the attachment and sale of any such property.
(2) Where no such property remains in the possession of the judgment-debtor and he fails to satisfy the Court that he has duly
applied such property of the deceased as is proved to have come into his possession, the decree may be executed against the
judgment-debtor to the extent of the property in respect of which he has failed so to satisfy the Court in the same manner as if the
decree had been against him personally.
Section 53. Liability of ancestral property.—For the purposes of section 50 and section 52, property in the hands of a son or other
descendant which is liable under Hindu law for the payment of the debt of a deceased ancestor, in respect of which a decree has
been passed, shall be deemed to be property of the deceased which has come to the hands of the son or other descendant as his
legal representative.
Section 54. Partition of estate or separation of share.—Where the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to the
payment of revenue to the Government, or for the separate possession of a share of such an estate, the partition of the estate or the
separation of the share shall be made by the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in
accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to the partition, or the separate possession of shares, of such
estates.
STATE AMENDMENT
Karnataka.—
For Section 54, the following Section shall be substituted, namely.—
“54. Partition of estate or separation of share.—Where the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to the
payment of revenue to the Government, or for the separate possession of a share of such an estate, the partition of the estate or the
separation of the share of such an estate shall be made by the Court in accordance with the law if any, for the time being in force
relating to the partition or the separate possession of shares, and if necessary on the report of a revenue officer, not below the
rank of Tahsildar or such other person as the Court may appoint as Commissioner in that behalf.”
[Vide Karnataka Act 36 of 1998, sec. 2.]
Arrest and detention
Section 55. Arrest and detention.—(1) A judgment-debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at, any hour and on
any day, and shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before the Court, and his detention may be in the civil prison
of the district in which the Court ordering the detention is situate, or, where such civil prison does not afford suitable
accommodation, in any other place which the State Government may appoint for the detention of persons ordered by
the Courts of such district to be detained:
Provided, firstly, that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwelling-house shall be entered after
sunset and before sunrise:
Provided, secondly, that no outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such dwelling-house is in
the occupancy of the judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but when the officer
authorised to make the arrest has duly gained access to any dwelling-house, he may break open the door of any room in
which he has reason to believe the judgment-debtor is to be found:
Provided, thirdly, that, if the room is in the actual occupancy of a woman who is not the judgment-debtor and who according to the
customs of the country does not appear in public, the officer authorised to make the arrest shall give notice to her that she is at liberty to
withdraw, and, after allowing a reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for withdrawing, may enter the
room for the purpose of making the arrest:
Provided, fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a judgment-debtor is arrested, is a decree for the payment of
money and the judgment-debtor pays the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the officer arresting him, such officer
shall at once release him.
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any person or class of persons whose arrest
might be attended with danger or inconvenience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a decree otherwise than in
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf.
(3) Where a judgment-debtor is arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money and brought before the Court, the
Court shall inform him that he may apply to be declared an insolvent, and that he 1[may be discharged] if he has not committed any act
of bad faith regarding the subject of the application and if he complies with the provisions of the law of insolvency for the time being
in force.
(4) Where a judgment-debtor expresses his intention to apply to be declared an insolvent and furnishes security, to
the satisfaction of the Court, that he will within one month so apply, and that he will appear, when called upon, in any
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1921, s. 2, for “will be discharged”.
54
proceeding upon the application or upon the decree in execution of which he was arrested, the Court 1[may release] him from arrest,
and, if he fails so to apply and to appear, the Court may either direct the security to be realized or commit him to the civil prison in
execution of the decree.
Section 56. Prohibition of arrest or detention of women in execution of decree for money.—Notwithstanding anything in this Part, the
Court shall not order the arrest or detention in the civil prison of a woman in execution of a decree for the payment of money.
Section 57. Subsistence-allowance.—The State Government may fix scales, graduated according to rank, race and nationality, of
monthly allowances payable for the subsistence of judgment-debtors.
Section 58. Detention and release.—(1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a decree shall be so detained,—
(a) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding 2[ 3[five thousand rupees], for a period not
exceeding three months, and,]
4[(b) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding two thousand rupees, but not exceeding five
thousand rupees, for a period not exceeding six weeks:]
Provided that he shall be released from such detention before the expiration of the 5[said period of detention] —
(i) on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention being paid to the officer in charge of the civil
prison, or
(ii) on the decree against him being otherwise fully satisfied, or
(iii) on the request of the person on whose application he has been so detained, or
(iv) on the omission by the person, on whose application he has been so detained, to pay subsistence
allowance:
Provided, also, that he shall not be released from such detention under clause (ii) or clause (iii), without the order of
the Court.
6[(1A) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no order for detention of the judgment-debtor in civil
prison in execution of a decree for the payment of money shall be made, where the total amount of the decree does not
exceed 7[two thousand rupees.]]
(2) A judgment-debtor released from detention under this section shall not merely by reason of his release be discharged
from his debt, but he shall not be liable to be re-arrested under the decree in execution of which he was detained in the civil
prison.
Section 59. Release on ground of illness.—(1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a judgment-debtor has been issued the
Court may cancel it on the ground of his serious illness.
(2) Where a judgment-debtor has been arrested, the Court may release him if, in its opinion, he is not in a fit state of health
to be detained in the civil prison.
(3) Where a judgment-debtor has been committed to the civil prison, he may be released therefrom—
(a) by the State Government, on the ground of the existence of any infectious or contagious disease, or
(b) by the committing Court, or any Court to which that Court is subordinate, on the ground of his suffering from any
serious illness.
(4) A judgment-debtor released under this section may be re-arrested, but the period of his detention in civil prison shall not
in the aggregate exceed that prescribed by section 58.
Attachment
Section 860. Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree.—(1) The following property is liable to attachment
and sale in execution of a decree, namely, lands, houses or other buildings, goods, money, bank-notes, cheques, bills of exchange,
hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities for money, debts, shares in a corporation and, save as
hereinafter mentioned, all other saleable property, movable or immovable, belonging to the judgment-debtor, or over which, or
the profits of which, he has a disposing power which he may exercise for his own benefit, whether the same be held in the name
of the judgment-debtor or by another person in trust for him or on his behalf:
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, namely:—
(a) the necessary wearing-apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedding of the judgment-debtor, his wife and children,
and such personal ornaments as, in accordance with religious usage, cannot be parted with by any woman;
(b) tools of artisans, and, where the judgment-debtor is an agriculturist, his implements of husbandry and such cattle
and seed-grain as may, in the opinion of the Court, be necessary to enable him to earn his livelihood as such, and such
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1921, s. 2, for “shall release”.
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 22, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 5, “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause (b) (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 22, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
6. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
7. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 5, for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
8. For amendments to s. 60, in its application to East Punjab, see the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934 (Pun. Act 7 of
1934), s. 35, as amended by Pun. Acts 12 of 1940 and 6 of 1942.
55
portion of agricultural produce or of any class of agricultural produce as may have been declared to be free from liability
under the provisions of the next following section;
(c) houses and other buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the land immediately
appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to 1[an agriculturist or a labourer or a
domestic servant] and occupied by him;
(d) books of account;
(e) a mere right to sue for damages;
(f) any right of personal service;
(g) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of the Government 2[or of a local authority or of any
other employer], or payable out of any service family pension fund 3notified in the Official Gazette by
4[the Central Government or the State Government] in this behalf, and political pensions;
5[(h) the wages of labourers and domestic servants, whether payable in money or in kind;
6***]
7[(i) salary to the extent of 8[the first 9[ 10[one thousand rupees]] and two third of the remainder] 11[in
execution of any decree other than a decree for maintenance]:
12[Provided that where any part of such portion of the salary as is liable to attachment has been under
attachment, whether continuously or intermittently, for a total period of twenty-four months, such portion
shall be exempt from attachment until the expiry of a further period of twelve months, and, where such
attachment has been made in execution of one and the same decree, shall, after the attachment has
continued for a total period of twenty-four months, be finally exempt from attachment in execution of that
deecree.]]
11[(ia) one-third of the salary in execution of any decree for maintenance;]
13[(j) the pay and allowances of persons to whom the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) or the Army
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), applies;]
(k) all compulsory deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the Provident Funds
Act, 14[1925], (19 of 1925), for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by the said Act not to be liable
to attachment;
2[(ka) all deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the Public Provident Fund
Act, 1968 (23 of 1968), for the time being applies, in so far as they are declared by the said Act as not to be
liable to attachment;
(kb) all moneys payable under a policy of insurance on the life of the judgment-debtor;
(kc) the interest of a lessee of a residential building to which the provisions of law for the time being in force
relating to control of rents and accommodation apply;]
15[(1) any allowance forming part of the emoluments of any 16[servant of the 17[Government]] or of any servant of a
railway company or local authority which the 18[appropriate Government] may by notification in the Official Gazette declare
to be exempt from attachment, and any subsistence grant or allowance made to 19[any such servant] while under
suspension;]
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for “an agriculturist” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977)
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. For such a notification, see Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 5.
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G.G. in C.”
5. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for clauses (h) and (i). The amendments made by that section have no effect in respect of any
proceedings arising out of a suit instituted before 1st June, 1937, see ibid., section 3.
6. The words “and salary, to the extent of the first hundred rupees and one-half the remainder of such salary” omitted by
Act 5 of 1943, s. 2.
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause (i) and the proviso.
8. Subs. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 2, for “the first hundred rupees”.
9. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for “two hundred rupees and one-half the remainder” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
10. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 6, for “four hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
11. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
12. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for “the proviso” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
13. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for clause (j) (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
14. Subs. by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, for “1897”.
15. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the original clause (l), see also footnote 3.
16. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for “public officer”.
17. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for “crown”.
18. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G.G. in C”.
19. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for “any such officer or servant”.
56
(m) an expectancy of succession by survivorship or other merely contingent or possible right or interest;
(n) a right to future maintenance;
(o) any allowance declared by 1[any Indian law] to be exempt from liability to attachment or sale in execution
of a decree; and
(p) where the judgment-debtor is a person liable for the payment of land-revenue; any movable property
which, under any law for the time being applicable to him, is exempt from sale for the recovery of an arrear of
.
such revenue.
2[Explanation I.—The moneys payable in relation to the matters mentioned in clauses (g), (h), (i), (ia), (j), (l)
and (o) are exempt from attachment or sale, whether before or after they are actually payable, and, in the case of
salary, the attachable portion thereof is liable to attachment, whether before or after it is actually payable.]
3[ 4[Explanation II.—In clauses (i) and (ia)], “salary” means the total monthly emoluments, excluding any
allowance declared exempt from attachment under the provisions of clause (1), derived by a person from his
employment whether on duty or on leave.]
5[Explanation 6[III]—In clause (1) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) as respects any 7[person] in the service of the Central Government, or any servant of 8[a Railway
Administration] or of a cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port, the Central Government;
9* * * * *
(iii) as respects any other 10[servant of the 11[Government]] or a servant of any other 12*** local authority,
the State Government.]
13[Explanation IV—For the purposes of this proviso, “wages” includes bonus, and “labourer” includes a skilled
unskilled or semi-skilled labourer.
Explanation V—For the purposes of this proviso, the expression “agriculturist” means a person who cultivates
land personally and who depends for his livelihood mainly on the income from agricultural land, whether as owner,
tenant, partner or agricultural labourer.
Explanation VI—For the purposes of Explanation V, an agriculturist shall be deemed to cultivate land
personally, if he cultivates land—
(a) by his own labour, or
(b) by the labour of any member of his family, or
(c) by servants or labourers on wages payable in cash or in kind (not being as a share of the produce), or
both.]
13[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an agreement by which
a person agrees to waive the benefit of any exemption under this section shall be void.]
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed 14*** to exempt houses and other buildings (with the materials and the
sites thereof and the lands immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) from attachment or sale in
execution of decrees for rent of any such house, building, site or land 15***
16* * * * *
STATE AMENDMENTS
Kerala.—
In clause (g) of the Proviso to sub-section (1) of section 60, after the words “stipends and gratuities allowed
by pensioners of the Government” the words “or of a local authority” shall be inserted.
[Vide Kerala Act 13 of 1957, s. 3]
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “any law passed under the Indian Councils Act 1861 and 1892”.
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for Explanation I (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Added by Act 9 of 1937, s. 2, The amendments made by that section shall not effect in respect of any proceeding arising out of
any suit instituted before 1st June, 1937, see ibid., section 3.
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, “Explanation 2.—in clauses (h) and (i)” (w.e.f. 1-2- 1977).
5. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.
6. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23, for figure “3” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
7. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for “Public officer”.
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “a Federal Railway”.
9. Clause (ii) omitted by the A.O. 1948.
10. Subs. by Act 5 of 1943, s. 2, for “public officer”.
11. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for “crown”.
12. The words “railway or” omitted by the A.O. 1950.
13. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
14. The brackets and letter “(a)”, rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.
15. The word “or” rep. by s. 3, ibid., and the Second Schedule.
16. Clause (b) rep. by s. 3 ibid., and the Second Schedule.
57
In the proviso to sub section (1) of section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5
of 1908), after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —
“(gg) all moneys payable to the beneficiaries under the Family Benefit Scheme for the employees
of the Government of Kerala.”
[Vide Kerala Act 1 of 1988, s. 2.]
Himachal Pradesh.—
Amendment in section 60. — (1) In Section 60 sub-section (1):
(i) at the end of clause (c), add the following:
or compensation paid for such houses and buildings (including compensation for the materials and
the sites and the land referred to above) acquired for a public purpose;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: —
(cc) compensation paid for agricultural lands belonging to agriculturists and acquired for a public
purpose;
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1956, sec. 2.]
Tamil Nadu
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908.—In clause (g) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, after the words “stipends and gratuities allowed to
pensioners of the Government”, the words “or of a authority” shall be inserted.
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act XXXIV of 1950, s. 2]
Rajasthan
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908.-In clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 60 of the code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) in its application to the State of
Rajasthan, after the word, “agriculturist” the words “his milch cattle and those likely to calve within two
years” shall be inserted.
[Vide Rajasthan Act 19 of 1958, s. 2]
Uttar Pradesh
Amendment of section 60, Central Act V of 1908.- In the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 60 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) in the application thereof to the State of
Rajasthan,-
(i) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
(kk) moneys payable under Life Insurance Certificates issued in pursuance of the Rajasthan
Government Servants Insurance Rules, 1953;" and
(ii) after explanation 3 the following explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
''Explanation 4.-Where any money payable to a Government servant of the State is exempt from
attachment under the provision contained in clause (kk), such money shall remain exempt from attachment
notwithstanding the fact that owing to the death of a Government servant it is payable to some other person."
[Vide Rajasthan Act 16 of 1957, s. 2]
Uttar Pradesh
Addition of explanation (1-A) to sub-section (1) of section 60.— After Explanation (1) of sub-section (1) of
section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, insert the following Explanation (I-A) ;
“Explanation (I-A) — Particulars mentioned in clause (c) are exempt from sale in execution of a
decree whether passed before or after the commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (United
Provinces Amendment) Act, 1908, for enforcement of a mortgage or charge thereon”.
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XXXV of 1948, s. 2]
Section 61. Partial exemption of agricultural produce.—The State Government 1*** may, by general or special order
published in the Official Gazette, declare that such portion of agricultural produce, or of any class of agricultural
produce, as may appear to the State Government to be necessary for the purpose of providing until the
next harvest for the due cultivation of the land and for the support of the judgment-debtor and his family, shall, in
the case of all agriculturists or of any class of agriculturists, be exempted from liability to attachment or sale in
execution of a decree.
1. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C.” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule.
58
Section 62. Seizure of property in dwelling-house.—(1) No person executing any process under this Code directing or
authorising seizure of movable property shall enter any dwelling-house after sunset and before sunrise.
(2) No outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such dwelling-house is in the occupancy of
the judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but when the person executing any such
process has duly gained access to any dwelling-house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has
reason to believe any such property to be.
(3) Where a room in a dwelling-house is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, according to the customs of the
country, does not appear in public, the person executing the process shall give notice to such woman that she is at liberty
to withdraw; and, after allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for withdrawing, he
may enter such room for the purpose of seizing the property, using at the same time every precaution, consistent with these
provisions, to prevent its clandestine removal.
Section 63. Property attached in execution of decrees of several Courts.—(1) Where property not in the custody of any
Court is under attachment in execution of decrees of more Courts than one, the Court which shall receive or realize such
property and shall determine any claim thereto and any objection to the attachment thereof shall be the Court of highest
grade, or, where there is no difference in grade between such Courts, the Court under whose decree the property was first
attached.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any proceeding taken by a Court executing one of such
decrees.
1[Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (2), “proceeding taken by a Court” does not include an order
allowing, to a decree-holder who has purchased property at a sale held in execution of a decree, set off to the extent
of the purchase price payable by him.]
Section 64. Private alienation of property after attachment to be void.—2[(1)] Where an attachment has been made,
any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the judgment-
debtor of any debt, dividend or other monies contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims
enforceable under the attachment.
3[(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any
interest therein, made in pursuance of any contract for such transfer or delivery entered into and registered before the
attachment.]
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, claims enforceable under an attachment include claims for the rateable
distribution of assets.
Sale
Section 65. Purchaser’s title.—Where immovable property is sold in execution of a decree and such sale has become absolute, the
property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time when the property is sold and not from the time when the
sale becomes absolute.
66. [Suit against purchaser not maintainable on ground of purchase being on behalf of plaintiff.]— Rep. by Act, 1988
(45 of 1988), s. 7 (w.e.f. 19-5-1988).
67. Power for State Government to make rules as to sales of land in execution of decrees for payment of
money. — 4[(1)] The State Government 5*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for any local area
imposing conditions in respect of the sale of any class of interests in land in execution of decrees for the payment of
money, where such interest are so uncertain or undetermined as, in the opinion of the State Government, to make it
impossible to fix their value.
6[(2) When on the date on which this Code came into operation in any local area, any special rules as to sale of
land in execution of decrees were in force therein, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette
declare such rules to be in force, or may 5*** by a like notification, modify the same.
Every notification issued in the exercise of the powers conferred by this sub-section shall set out the rules so
continued or modified.]
7[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State
Legislature.]
1. Explanation ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Section 64 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act 22 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
4. Section 67 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act 1 of 1914, s. 3.
5. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C.” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the Schedule.
6. Added by Act 1 of 1914, s. 3.
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-3-1984).
59
Delegation to Collector of Power to execute decrees
against immovable property
68. [Power to prescribe rules for transferring to collector execution of certain decrees.]— Rep.
by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956), s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
69. [Provisions of Third Schedule to apply.]— Rep. by s. 7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
70. [Rules of Procedure.]— Rep. by s. 7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
71. [Collector deemed to be acting judicially.]— Rep. by s. 7 ibid, (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
72. [Where Court may authorize Collector to stay Public Sale of Land.]—Rep. by s. 7, ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
Distribution of assets
Section 73. Proceeds of execution-sale to be rateably distributed among decree-holders.—(1) Where
assets are held by a Court and more persons than one have, before the receipt of such assets, made
application to the Court for the execution of decrees for the payment of money passed against the same
judgment-debtor and have not obtained satisfaction thereof, the assets, after deducting the costs of
realisation, shall be rateably distributed among all such persons:
Provided as follows:—
(a) where any property is sold subject to a mortgage or charge, the mortgage or incumbrancer shall
not be entitled to share in any surplus arising from such sale;
(b) where any property liable to be sold in execution of a decree is subject to a mortgage or charge,
the Court may, with the consent of the mortgagee or incumbrancer, order that the property be sold free
from the mortgage or charge, giving to the mortgagee or incumbrancer the same interest in the
proceeds of the sale as he had in the property sold;
(c) where any immovable property is sold in execution of a decree ordering its sale for the
discharge of an incumbrance thereon, the proceeds of sale shall be applied—
First, in defraying the expenses of the sale;
Secondly, in discharging the amount due under the decree;
Thirdly, in discharging the interest and principal monies due on subsequent incumbrances
(if any); and
Fourthly, rateably among the holders of decrees for the payment of money against the
judgment-debtor, who have, prior to the sale of the property, applied to the Court which passed the
decree ordering such sale for execution of such decrees, and have no obtained satisfaction thereof.
(2) Where all or any of the assets liable to be rateably distributed under this section are paid to a
person not entitled to receive the same, any person so entitled may sue such person to compel him to
refund the assets.
(3) Nothing in this section affects any right of the Government.
Resistance to execution
Section 74. Resistance to execution.— Where the Court is satisfied that the holder of a decree for the
possession of immovable property or that the purchaser of immovable property sold in execution of a
decree has been resisted or obstructed in obtaining possession of the property by the judgment-debtor or
some person on his behalf and that such resistance or obstruction was without any just cause, the Court
may, at the instance of the decree-holder or purchaser, order the judgment-debtor or such other person to
be detained in the civil prison for a term which may extend to thirty days and may further direct that the
decree-holder or purchaser be put into possession of the property.
PART III
INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS
Commissions
Section 75. Power of Court to issue commissions.—Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
prescribed, the Court may issue a commission—
(a) to examine any person;
(b) to make a local investigation;
(c) to examine or adjust accounts; or
(d) to make a partition;
1[(e) to hold a scientific, technical, or expert investigation;
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
60
(f) to conduct sale of property which is subject to speedy and natural decay and which is in the
custody of the Court pending the determination of the suit;
(g) to perform any ministerial act.]
Section 76. Commission to another Court.—(1) A commission for the examination of any person may be
issued to any Court (not being a High Court) situate in a State other than the State in which the Court of
issue is situate and having jurisdiction in the place in which the person to be examined resides.
(2) Every Court receiving a commission for the examination of any person under sub-section (1) shall
examine him or cause him to be examined pursuant thereto, and the commission, when it has been duly
executed, shall be returned together with the evidence taken under it to the Court from which it was
issued, unless the order for issuing the commission has otherwise directed, in which case the commission
shall be returned in terms of such order.
Section 77. Letter of request.—In lieu of issuing a commission the Court may issue a letter of request to
examine a witness residing at any place not within 1[India.]
Section 78. Commissions issued by foreign Courts.—Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
prescribed the provisions as to the execution and return of commissions for the examination of witnesses
shall apply to commissions issued by or at the instance of—
(a) Courts situate in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend; or
(b) Courts established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India; or
(c) Courts of any State or country outside India.]
PART IV
SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES
SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR PUBLIC OFFICERS IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY
Section 79. Suits by or against Government.—In a suit by or against the Government, the authority to be
named as plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, shall be—
(a) in the case of a suit by or against the Central Government, 4[the Union of India], and
(b) in the case of a suit by or against a State Government, the State.]
Section 80. Notice.— 5[(1)] 6[ Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), no suits 7[shall be instituted]
against the Government (including the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir)] or against a
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity,
until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been 8[delivered to, or left at the office
of—]
(a) in the case of a suit against the Central Government, 9[except where it relates to a railway] a
Secretary to that Government;
10[(b)] in the case of a suit against the Central Government where it relates to railway, the General
Manager of that railway;
11[(bb) in the case of a suit against the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Chief
Secretary to that Government or any other officer authorized by that Government in this behalf;]
(c) in the case of a suit against 12[any other State Government], a Secretary to that Government or
the Collector of the district; 13***
14* * * * *
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 3, for “the States”.
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for s. 78 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for s. 79.
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Dominion of India”.
5. S. 80 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
6. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “No suit shall be instituted” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 3, for “shall be instituted against the Government” (w.e.f. 5-6-1964). The words in italics were
subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “Instituted against the Crown”.
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “in the case of the Secretary of State in Council, delivered to, or left at the office of a Secretary to
the L.G. or the Collector of the District”.
9. Ins. by Act 6 of 1948, s. 2.
10. Clause (aa) ins. by Act 6 of 1948, s. 2 and relettered as clause (b) and the Former clause (b) omitted by the A.O. 1948.
11. Ins. by Act 26 of 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-6-1964).
12. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “a State Government” (w.e.f. 5-6-1964).
13. The word “and” omitted by the A.O. 1948.
14. Clause (d) omitted by the A.O. 1948.
61
and, in the case of a public officer, delivered to him or left at his office, stating the cause of action, the
name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims; and the plaint
shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.
1[(2) A suit to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against the Government (including the
Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir) or any public officer in respect of any act purporting to
be done by such public officer in his official capacity, may be instituted, with the leave of the Court,
without serving any notice as required by sub-section (1); but the Court shall not grant relief in the suit,
whether interim or otherwise, except after giving to the Government or public officer, as the case may be,
a reasonable opportunity of showing cause in respect of the relief prayed for in the suit:
Provided that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after hearing the parties, that no urgent or immediate
relief need be granted in the suit, return the plaint for presentation to it after complying with the
requirements of sub-section (1).
(3) No suit instituted against the Government or against a public officer in respect of any act
purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity shall be dismissed merely by reason
of any error or defect in the notice referred to in sub-section (1), if in such notice—
(a) the name, description and the residence of the plaintiff had been so given as to enable the
appropriate authority or the public officer to identify the person serving the notice and such notice
had been delivered or left at the office of the appropriate authority specified in sub-section (1), and
(b) the cause of action and the relief claimed by the plaintiff had been substantially indicated.]
Section 81. Exemption from arrest and personal appearance.—In a suit instituted against a public officer
in respect of any act purporting to be done by him in his official capacity—
(a) the defendant shall not be liable to arrest nor his property to attachment otherwise than in
execution of a decree, and,
(b) where the Court is satisfied that the defendant cannot absent himself from his duty without
detriment to the public service, it shall exempt him from appearing in person.
Section 82. Execution of decree.—2[(1) Where, in a suit by or against the Government or by or against a
public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by him in his official capacity, a decree is passed
against the Union of India or a State or, as the case may be, the public officer, such decree shall not be
executed except in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2).]
(2) Execution shall not be issued on any such decree unless it remains unsatisfied for the period of
three months computed from the date of 3[such decree].
4[(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to an order or award as they
apply in relation to a decree, if the order or award—
(a) is passed or made against 5[the Union of India] or a State or a public officer in respect of any
such act as aforesaid, whether by a Court or by any other authority; and
(b) is capable of being executed under the provisions of this Code or of any other law for the time
being in force as if it were a decree.]
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “such report” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 1949, s. 2.
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Dominion of India”.
62
1[Suits by Aliens and by or against Foreign Rulers, Ambassadors And Envoys]
Section 83. When aliens may sue.—Alien enemies residing in India with the permission of the Central
Government, and alien friends, may sue in any Court otherwise competent to try the suit, as if they were
citizens of India, but alien enemies residing in India without such permission, or residing in a foreign country,
shall not sue in any such Court.
Explanation.—Every person residing in a foreign country, the Government of which is at war with India
and carrying on business in that country without a licence in that behalf granted by the Central Government,
shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be an alien enemy residing in a foreign country.
Section 84. When foreign States may sue.—A foreign State may sue in any competent Court:
Provided that the object of the suit is to enforce a private right vested in the Ruler of such State or in
any officer of such State in his public capacity.
85. Persons specially appointed by Government to prosecute or defend on behalf of foreign
Rulers.—(1) The Central Government may, at the request of the Ruler of a foreign State or at the request of
any person competent in the opinion of the Central Government to act on behalf of such Ruler, by order,
appoint any persons to prosecute or defend any suit on behalf of such Ruler, and any persons so appointed
shall be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom appearances, acts and applications under this Code
may be made or done on behalf of such Ruler.
(2) An appointment under this section may be made for the purpose of a specified suit or of several
specified suits, or for the purpose of all such suits as it may from time to time be necessary to prosecute or
defend on behalf of such Ruler.
(3) A person appointed under this section may authorise or appoint any other persons to make
appearances and applications and do acts in any such suit or suits as if he were himself a party thereto.
Section 86. Suits against foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys.—(1) No. 2*** foreign State may be
sued in any Court otherwise competent to try the suit except with the consent of the Central Government
certified in writing by a Secretary to that Government:
Provided that a person may, as a tenant of immovable property, sue without such consent as aforesaid
3[a foreign State] from whom he holds or claims to hold the property.
(2) Such consent may be given with respect to a specified suit or to several specified suits or with
respect to all suits of any specified class or classes, and may specify, in the case of any suit or class of
suits, the Court in which 4[the foreign State] may be sued, but it shall not be given, unless it appears to the
Central Government that 4[the foreign State]—
(a) has instituted a suit in the Court against the person desiring to sue 5[it], or
(b) by 6[itself] or another, trades within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or
(c) is in possession of immovable property situate within those limits and is to be sued with reference to
such property or for money charged thereon, or
(d) has expressly or impliedly waived the privilege accorded to 5[it] by this section.
7[(3) Except with the consent of the Central Government, certified in writing by a Secretary to that
Government, no decree shall be executed against the property of any foreign State.]
(4) The preceding provisions of this section shall apply in relation to—
8[(a) any ruler of a foreign State;]
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 12, for the former heading and sections 83 to 87 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
2. The words “Ruler of a” omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “a Ruler” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “the Ruler (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “him” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
6. Subs. by 29, ibid., for “himself” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
7. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
8. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
63
1[(aa)] any Ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State;
(b) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country; and
(c) any such member of the staff 2[of the foreign State or the staff or retinue of the Ambassador] or
Envoy of a foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country as the Central
Government may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf,
3[as they apply in relation to a foreign State].
4[(5) The following persons shall not be arrested under this Code, namely: —
(a) any Ruler of a foreign State;
(b) any Ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State;
(c) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country;
(d) any such member of the staff of the foreign State or the staff or retinue of the Ruler, Ambassador
or Envoy of a foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country, as the Central
Government may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.
(6) Where a request is made to the Central Government for the grant of any consent referred to in
sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, before refusing to accede to the request in whole or in part, give
to the person making the request a reasonable opportunity of being heard.]
Section 87. Style of foreign Rulers as parties to suits.—The Ruler of a foreign State may sue, and shall be sued,
in the name of his State:
Provided that in giving the consent referred to in section 86, the Central Government may direct that the
Ruler may be sued in the name of an agent or in any other name.
Section 87A. Definitions of “Foreign State” and “Rulers”.— (1) In this Part,—
(a) “foreign State” means any State outside India which has been recognised by the Central
Government; and
(b) “Ruler”, in relation to a foreign State, means the person who is for the time being recognised by
the Central Government to be the head of that State.
(2) Every Court shall take judicial notice of the fact—
(a) that a State has or has not been recognised by the Central Government;
(b) that a person has or has not been recognised by the Central Government to be the head of a State.
Suits against Rulers of former Indian States
Section 87B. Applications of sections 85 and 86 to Rulers of former Indian States.—5[(1) In the case of any
suit by or against the Ruler of any former Indian State which is based wholly or in part upon a cause of action
which arose before the commencement of the Constitution or any proceeding arising out of such suit, the
provisions of section 85 and sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 86 shall apply in relation to such Ruler as they
apply in relation to the Ruler of a foreign State.]
(2) In this section—
(a) “former Indian State” means any such Indian State as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of this section; 6***
1. Clause (a) re-lettered as clause (aa) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid, for “or retinue of the Ruler, Ambassador” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid, for “as they apply in relation to the Ruler of a foreign State” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5. Subs. by Act 54 of 1972, s. 3, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 9-9-1972).
6. The word “and” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-9-1972).
64
1[(b) “Commencement of the Constitution” means the 26th day of January, 1950; and
(c) “Ruler”, in relation to a former Indian State, has the same meaning as in article 363 of the
Constitution. ]
Interpleader
Section 88. Where interpleader suit may be instituted.—Where two or more persons claim adversely to
one another the same debts, sum of money or other property, movable or immovable, from another
person, who claims no interest therein other than for charges or costs and who is ready to pay or deliver it
to the rightful claimant, such other person may institute a suit of interpleader against all the claimants for
the purpose of obtaining a decision as to the person to whom the payment or delivery shall be made and
of obtaining indemnity for himself:
Provided that where any suit is pending in which the rights of all parties can properly be decided, no
such suit of interpleader shall be instituted.
PART V
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Arbitration
Section 89. Settlement of disputes outside the Court.—(1) Where it appears to the Court that there exist
elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court shall formulate the terms of
settlement and give them to the parties for their observations and after receiving the observations of the
parties, the Court may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement and refer the same for:—
(a) arbitration;
(b) conciliation;
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat; or
(d) mediation.
(2) Were a dispute has been referred—
(a) for arbitration or conciliation, the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration or conciliation
were referred for settlement under the provisions of that Act;
(b) to Lok Adalat, the Court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and all other
provisions of that Act shall apply in respect of the dispute so referred to the Lok Adalat;
.
(c) for judicial settlement, the Court shall refer the same to a suitable institution or person and
such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Adalat and all the provisions of the Legal
Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) shall apply as if the dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat
under the provisions of that Act;
(d) for mediation, the Court shall effect a compromise between the parties and shall follow such
procedure as may be prescribed.]
Special case
Section 90. Power to state case for opinion of Court.—Where any persons agree in writing to state a case
for the opinion of the Court, then the Court shall try and determine the same in the manner prescribed.
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1972, s. 3, for clause (b) (w.e.f. 9-9-1972).
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002), Earlier rep by Act 10 of 1940, s. 49 or the Third Schedule.
65
1[Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public]
Section 91. Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public.—2[(1) In the case of a public
nuisance or other wrongful act affecting, or likely to affect, the public, a suit for a declaration and injunction
or for such other relief as may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, may be instituted,—
(a) by the Advocate-General, or
(b) with the leave of the Court, by two or more persons, even though no special damage has been
caused to such persons by reason of such public nuisance or other wrongful act.]
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any right of suit which may
exist independently of its provisions.
Section 392. Public charities.—(1) In the case of any alleged breach of any express or constructive trust
created for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature, or where the direction of the Court is
deemed necessary for the administration of any such trust, the Advocate-General, or two or more persons
having an interest in the trust and having obtained the 4[leave of the Court,] may institute a suit, whether
contentious or not, in the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction or in any other Court empowered in
that behalf by the State Government within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of
the subject-matter of the trust is situate to obtain a decree :—
(a) removing any trustee;
(b) appointing a new trustee;
(c) vesting any property in a trustee;
5[(cc) directing a trustee who has been removed or a person who has ceased to be a trustee, to
deliver possession of any trust property in his possession to the person entitled to the possession of
such property];
(d) directing accounts and inquiries;
(e) declaring what proportion of the trust property or of the interest therein shall be allocated to
any particular object of the trust;
(f) authorizing the whole or any part of the trust property to be let, sold, mortgaged or exchanged;
(g) settling a scheme; or
(h) granting such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.
(2) Save as provided by the Religious Endowments Act, 1863 (20 of 1863), 6[or by any corresponding
law in force in 7[the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in
Part B States]], no suit claiming any of the reliefs specified in sub-section (1) shall be instituted in respect
of any such trust as is therein referred to except in conformity with the provisions of that sub-section.
8[(3) The Court may alter the original purposes of an express or constructive trust created for public
purposes of a charitable or religious nature and allow the property or income of such trust or any portion
thereof to be applied cy pres in one or more of the following circumstances, namely:—
(a) where the original purposes of the trust, in whole or in part,—
(i) have been, as far as may be, fulfilled; or
(ii) cannot be carried out at all, or cannot be carried out according to the directions given in
the instrument creating the trust or, where there is no such instrument, according to the spirit of
the trust; or
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 30, for the former headings (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. S. 92 shall not apply to any religious trust in Bihar, see Bihar Act 1 of 1951.
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 31, for “consent in writing of the Advocate-General” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
7. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 2), 1956, for “a Part B State”.
8. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
66
(b) where the original purposes of the trust provide a use for a part only of the property available
by virtue of the trust; or
(c) where the property available by virtue of the trust and other property applicable for similar
purposes can be more effectively used in conjunction with, and to that end can suitably be made
applicable to any other purpose, regard being had to the spirit of the trust and its applicability to
common purposes; or
(d) where the original purposes, in whole or in part, were laid down by reference to an area which
then was, but has since ceased to be, a unit for such purposes; or
(e) where the original purposes, in whole or in part, have, since they were laid down,—
(i) been adequately provided for by other means, or
(ii) ceased, as being useless or harmful to the community, or
(iii) ceased to be, in law, charitable, or
(iv) ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and effective method of using the property
available by virtue of the trust, regard being had to the spirit of the trust.]
Section 93. Exercise of powers of Advocate-General outside presidency-towns.—The powers conferred by
sections 91 and 92 on the Advocate-General may, outside the presidency-towns, be, with the previous
sanction of the State Government, exercised also by the Collector or by such officer as the State
Government may appoint in this behalf.
PART VI
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS
Section 94. Supplemental proceedings.—In order to prevent the ends of justice from being defeated the
Court may, if it is so prescribed,—
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why he
should not give security for his appearance, and if he fails to comply with any order for security
commit him to the civil prison;
(b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property belonging to him and to place
the same at the disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property;
(c) grant a temporary injunction and in case of disobedience commit the person guilty thereof to
the civil prison and order that his property be attached and sold;
(d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his duties by attaching and
selling his property;
(e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the Court to be just and convenient.
95. Compensation for obtaining arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient
grounds.—(1) Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attachment has been effected or a temporary
injunction granted under the last preceding section,—
(a) it appears to the Court that such arrest, attachment or injunction was applied for on insufficient
grounds, or
(b) the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appears to the Court that there was no reasonable or probable
grounds for instituting the same,
the defendant may apply to the Court, and the Court may, upon such application, award against the
plaintiff by its order such amount 1[not exceeding fifty thousand rupees], as it deems a reasonable
compensation to the defendant for the 2[expense or injury (including injury to reputation) caused to him]:
Provided that a Court shall not award, under this section, an amount exceeding the limits of its
pecuniar jurisdiction.
(2) An order determining any such application shall bar any suit for compensation in respect of such
arrest, attachment or injunction.
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 8, for “not exceeding one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
2. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 32, for “expense or injury caused to him” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
67
PART VII
APPEALS
Appeals from original decrees
Section 96. Appeal from original decree.—(1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the body of this
Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie from every decree passed by any
Court exercising original jurisdiction to the Court authorized to hear appeals from the decisions of such
Court.
(2) An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex parte.
(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court with the consent of parties.
1[(4) No appeal shall lie, except on a question of law, from a decree in any suit of the nature
cognisable by Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value of the subject-matter of the original suit
does not exceed 2[ten thousand rupees].]
Section 97. Appeal from final decree where no appeal from preliminary decree.—Where any party
aggrieved by a preliminary decree passed after the commencement of this Code does not appeal from such
decree, he shall be precluded from disputing its correctness in any appeal which may be preferred from
the final decree.
Section 98. Decision where appeal heard by two or more Judges.—(1) Where an appeal is heard by a Bench
of two or more Judges, the appeal shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of the
majority (if any) of such Judges.
(2) Where there is no such majority which concurs in a judgment varying or reversing the decree
appealed from, such decree shall be confirmed :
Provided that where the Bench hearing the appeal is 3[composed of two or other even number of
Judges belonging to a Court consisting of more Judges than those constituting the Bench] and the Judges
composing the Bench differ in opinion on a point of law, they may state the point of law upon which they
differ and the appeal shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other Judges, and
such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority (if any) of the Judges who have heard
the appeal, including those who first heard it.
4[(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or otherwise affect any provision of the letters to
patent of any High Court.]
99. No decree to be reversed or modified for error or irregularity not affecting merits or
jurisdiction.—No decree shall be reversed or substantially varied, nor shall any case be remanded, in appeal
on account of any misjoinder 5[or non-joinder] of parties or causes of action or any error, defect or irregularity
in any proceedings in the suit, not affecting the merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the Court:
6[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to non-joinder of a necessary party.]
7[99A. No order under section 47 to be reversed or modified unless decision of the case is
prejudicially affected.—Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 99, no order under
section 47 shall be reversed or substantially varied, on account of any error, defect or irregularity in any
proceeding relating to such order, unless such error, defect or irregularity has prejudicially affected the decision
of the case.]
Appeals from appellate decrees
Section 100. Second appeal.—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 9, for “three thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 1928, s. 2 and the First Schedule.
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 35 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
6. Proviso Added by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
7. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
8. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for section 100 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
68
other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the High Court from every decree passed in
appeal by any Court subordinate to the High Court, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a
substantial question of law.
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex parte.
(3) In an appeal under this section, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the substantial
question of law involved in the appeal.
(4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall
formulate that question.
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent shall, at the hearing of
the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such question:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the
Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law, not
formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.]
STATE AMENDMENT
Kerala.
In sub-section (1) of section 100 of the Principal Act, after clause (c), the following clause shall be
added, namely:
(d) the finding of the lower appellate court on any question of fact material to the right decision of the
case on the merits being in conflict with the finding of the Court of first instance on such question.
[Vide Kerala Act 13 of 1957 s. 4]
Section 100A. No further appeal in certain cases.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any Letters Patent
for any High Court or in any instrument having the force of law or in any other law for the time being in force,
where any appeal from an original or appellate decree or order is heard and decided by a Single Judge of a
High Court, no further appeal shall lie from the judgment and decree of such Single Judge.]
Section 101. Second appeal on no other grounds.—No second appeal shall lie except on the ground
mentioned in section 100.
Section 102. No second appeal in certain cases.—No second appeal shall lie from any decree, when the
subject matter of the original suit is for recovery of money not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees.]
Section 103. Power of High Court to determine issue of fact.—In any second appeal, the High Court
may, if the evidence on the record is sufficient, determine any issue necessary for the disposal of the
appeal,—
(a) which has not been determined by the lower Appellate Court or both by the Court of first
instance and the lower Appellate Court, or
(b) which has been wrongly determined by such Court or Courts by reason of a decision on such
question of law as is referred to in section 100.]
Appeals from orders
Section 104. Orders from which appeal lies.—(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders, and save as
otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any law for the time being in force, from no
other orders:—
4* * * * *
5[(ff) an order under section 35A;]
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2002, s. 4, for section 100A (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for section 102 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
3. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 40, for section 103 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Clauses (a) to (f) omitted by Act 10 of 1940, s. 49 and the Sch. III.
5. Ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 3, see also foot-note to section 35A, Supra.
69
1[(ffa) an order under section 91 or section 92 refusing leave to institute a suit of the nature
referred to in section 91 or section 92, as the case may be;]
(g) an order under section 95;
(h) an order under any of the provisions of this Code imposing a fine or directing the arrest or
detention in the civil prison of any person except where such arrest or detention is in execution of a
decree;
(i) any order made under rules from which an appeal is expressly allowed by rules:
2[Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order specified in clause (ff) save on the ground
that no order, or an order for the payment of a less amount, ought to have been made.]
(2) No appeal shall lie from any order passed in appeal under this section.
Section 105. Other orders.—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, no appeal shall lie from any order
made by a Court in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction; but where a decree is appealed
from, any error, defect or irregularity in any order, affecting the decision of the case, may be set forth as a
ground of objection in the memorandum of appeal.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any party aggrieved by an order of
remand 3*** from which an appeals lies does not appeal therefrom, he shall thereafter be precluded from
disputing its correctness.
Section 106. What Courts to hear appeals.—Where an appeal from any order is allowed it shall lie to the Court
to which an appeal would lie from the decree in the suit in which such order was made, or where such order is
made by a Court (not being a High Court) in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, then to the High Court.
General provisions relating to appeals
Section 107. Powers of Appellate Court.—(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
prescribed, an Appellate Court shall have power—
(a) to determine a case finally;
(b) to remand a case;
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;
(d) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers and shall perform as nearly
as may be the same duties as are conferred and imposed by this Code on Courts of original jurisdiction in
respect of suits instituted therein.
Section 108. Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders.—The provisions of this Part
relating to appeals from original decrees shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals—
(a) from appellate decrees, and
(b) from orders made under this Code or under any special or local law in which a different
procedure is not provided.
Appeals to the Supreme Court
Section 109. When appeals lie to the Supreme Court.—Subject to the provisions in Chapter IV of Part V of
the Constitution and such rules as may, from time to time, be made by the Supreme Court regarding appeals
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 41 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 3, see also foot-note to section 35A, Supra.
3. The Words “made after the commencement of this Code” omitted by Act 104 of 1976, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Subs. by Act 49 of 1973, s. 2, for section 109 (w.e.f. 29-11-1973).
70
from the Courts of India, and to the provisions hereinafter contained, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court, if the High Court certifies—
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and
(ii) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme
Court.]
110. [Value of subject matters.] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1973
(49 of 1973), s. 3 (w.e.f. 29-11-1973).
111. [Bar of certain appeals.] Rep. by the A.O. 1950.
1[111A. [Appeals to Federal Court] Rep. by the Federal Court Act, 1941 (21 of 1941), s. 2
(w.e.f. 1-9-1942).
Section 112. Savings.—2[(1) Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed—
(a) to affect the powers of the Supreme Court under article 136 or any other provision of the
Constitution; or
(b) to interfere with any rules made by the Supreme Court, and for the time being in force for the
presentation of appeals to that Court, or their conduct before that Court.]
(2) Nothing herein contained applies to any matter of criminal or admiralty or vice-admiralty
jurisdiction or to appeals from orders and decrees of Prize Courts.
PART VIII
REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION
Section 113. Reference to High Court.—Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed,
any Court may state a case and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court, and the High Court may
make such order thereon as it thinks fit:
3[Provided that where the Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a question as to the
validity of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in an Act, Ordinance or
Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that
such Act, Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative, but has not been so declared by the
High Court to which that Court is subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case
setting out its opinion and the reasons therefor, and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court.
Explanation.—In this section, “Regulation” means any Regulation of the Bengal, Bombay or Madras
Code or Regulation as defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), or in the General Clauses
Act of a State.]
Section 114. Review.—Subject as aforesaid, any person considering himself aggrieved—
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but from which no appeal
has been preferred,
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Code, or
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes,
may apply for a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order, and the
Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.
Section 115. Revision.—4[(1)] The High Court may call for the record of any case which has been decided by
any Court subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate
Court appears—
1. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the former sub-section (1).
3. Added by Act 24 of 1951, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
4. S. 115 re-numbered as sub-section (1) by Act 104 of 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
71
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity,
the High Court may make such order in the case as it thinks fit:
1[Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any order made, or any order
deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or other proceeding, except where the order, if it had been made in
favour of the party applying for revision would have finally disposed of the suit or other proceedings.]
2[(2) The High Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any decree or order against which
an appeal lies either to the High Court or to any Court subordinate thereto.
3[(3) A revision shall not operate as a stay of suit or other proceeding before the Court except where
such suit or other proceeding is stayed by the High Court.]
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “any case which has been decided” includes any order
made, or any order deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding.]
STATE AMENDMENTS
Orrisa
Amendment of section 115.—In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for section 115, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
Section 116. Part to apply only to certain High Courts.—This Part applies only to High Courts 2[not being
the court of a Judicial Commissioner.]
Section 117. Application of Code to High Courts.—Save as provided in this Part or in Part X or in rules, the
provisions of this Court shall apply to such High Courts.
Section 118. Execution of decree before ascertainment of costs.—Where any such High Court considers it
necessary that a decree passed in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction should be executed before
the amount of the costs incurred in the suit can be ascertained by taxation, the Court may order that the
decree shall be executed forthwith, except as to so much thereof as relates to the costs;
and, as to so much thereof as relates to the costs, that the decree may be executed as soon as the
amount of the costs shall be ascertained by taxation.
Section 119. Unauthorized persons not to address Court.—Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to
authorize any person on behalf of another to address the Court in the exercise of its original civil
jurisdiction, or to examine witnesses, except where the Court shall have in the exercise of the power
conferred by its charter authorized him so to do, or to interfere with the power of the High Court to make
rules concerning advocates, vakils and attorneys.
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 14, for “CHARTERED HIGH COURTS” (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 for “For Part A States and Part B States”.
76
Section 120. Provisions not applicable to High Court in original civil jurisdiction.—(1) The following
provisions shall not apply to the High Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, namely,
sections 16, 17 and 20.
1* * * * *
PART X
RULES
Section 121. Effect of rules in First Schedule.—The rules in a First Schedule shall have effect as if enacted
in the body of this Code until annulled or altered in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
Section 122. Power of certain High Courts to make rules.—2[High Courts 3[not being the Court of a
Judicial Commissioner]] 4*** may, from time to time after previous publication, make rules regulating
their own procedure and the procedure of the Civil Courts subjects to their superintendence, and may by
such rules annul, alter or add to all or any of the rules in the First Schedule.
Section 123. Constitution of Rules Committees in certain States.—(1) A Committee, to be called the Rule
Committee, shall be constituted at 5[the town which is the usual place of sitting of each of the High Courts
6*** referred to in section 122.]
(2) Each such Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) three Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee is constituted,
one of whom at least has served as a District Judge or 7*** a Divisional Judge for three years,
8[(b) two legal practitioners enrolled in that Court,]
9[(c) a Judge of a Civil Court subordinate to the High Court, 10***
11* * * * *
(3) The members of each Committee shall be appointed by the 12[High Court], which shall also
nominate one of their number to be President:
13* * * * *
(4) Each member of any such Committee shall hold office for such period as may be prescribed by
the 12[High Court] in this behalf; and whenever any member retires, resigns, dies or ceases reside in the
State in which the Committee was constituted, or becomes incapable of acting as a member of the
Committee, the said 12[High Court] may appoint another person to be a member in his stead.
(5) There shall be a secretary to each such Committee, who shall be appointed by the 12[High Court]
and shall receive such remuneration as may be provided in this behalf 14[by the State Government.]
1. Sub-section (2) rep. by Act 3 of 1909, s. 127 and Sch. III.
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Courts which are High Courts for the purposes of the Government of India Act,
1935”.
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “for Part A States and Part B States”. The words in italics were ins.
by Act 2 of 1951, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
4. The words “and the Chief Court of Lower Burma” rep. by Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and Sch. II.
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 1916, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “each of the towns of Calcutta, Madras, Bombay,
Allahabad, Lahore and Rangoon”.
6. The words “and of the Chief Court” omitted by the Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and Sch. II These words were again ins. by Act 32 of
1925, and subsequently omitted by the A.O. 1948.
7. The brackets and words “(in Burma)” rep. by Act 11 of 1923, s. 3 and Sch. II.
8. Subs. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 16, for clauses (b) and (c).
9. Clauses (d) and (e) re-lettered as clauses (c) and (d) respectively by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
10. The word “and” omitted by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and Sch. II (w.e.f. 26-11-1978).
11. Clause (d) omitted by s. 3, ibid. and Sch. II (w.e.f. 26-11-1978).
12. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 44, for “Chief Justice or Chief Judge” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
13. Proviso omitted by s. 44, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
14. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “by the G.G. in C. or by the L.G., as the case may be”.
77
STATE AMENDMENTS
Assam.—
For clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 123 the following shall be substituted—
“(a) three Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee is constituted,
provided that the Chief Justice may appoint only two Judges of the High Court on the Committee if the
number of Judges of the High Court does not exceed three.”
[Vide Assam Act 8 of 1953, sec. 2.]
Tamil Nadu
Amendment of section 123, Central Act V of 1908.—In section (2) of section 123 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 ( Central Act V of 1908),-
(a) in clause (b), for the words “two legal practitioners”, the words “three legal practitioners”
shall be substituted.
(b) in clause (d), the word “Madras” shall be omitted.
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1970, s. 2]
Section 124. Committee to report to High Court.—Every Rule Committee shall make a report to the High
Court established at the town at which it is constituted on any proposal to annul, alter or add to the rules
in the First Schedule or to make new rules, and before making any rules; under section 122 the High
Court shall take such report into consideration.
Section 125. Power of other High Courts to make rules.—High Courts, other than the Courts
specified in section 122, may exercise the powers conferred by that section in such manner and
subject to such conditions 1[as 2[the State Government] may determine:]
Provided that any such High Court may, after previous publication, make a rule extending within the
local limits of its jurisdiction any rules which have been made by any other High Court.
Section 126. Rules to be subject to approval.—Rules made under the foregoing provisions shall be subject to
the previous approval of the Government of the State in which the Court whose procedure the rules regulate
is situate or, if that Court is not situate in any State, to the previous approval of 4[Central Government.]]
Section 127. Publication of rules.—Rules so made and 5[approved] shall be published in the 6[Official Gazette], and
shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may be specified have the same force and effect, within
the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court which made them, as if they had been contained in the First
Schedule.
Section 128. Matters for which rules may provide.—(1) Such rules shall be not inconsistent with the provisions in the
body of this code, but, subject thereto, may provide for any matters relating to the procedure of Civil Courts.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1),
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the service of summonses, notices and other processes by post or in any other manner either
generally or in any specified areas, and the proof of such service;
(b) the maintenance and custody, while under attachment, of live-stock and other movable
property, the fees payable for such maintenance and custody, the sale of such live-stock and property,
and the proceeds of such sale;
(c) procedure in suits by way of counterclaim, and the valuation of such suits for the purposes of
jurisdiction;
(d) procedure in garnishee and charging orders either in addition to, or in substitution for, the
attachment and sale of debts;
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Sch. I, Pt. I, for “as the G.G. in C. may determine”.
2. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for “in the case of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner of Coorg, the G.G. in C., and, in other cases
the L.G.”.
3. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for section 126.
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Governor General”.
5. Subs. by Act 24 of 1917, s. 2 and Sch. I, for “sanctioned”.
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Gazette of India or in the local Official Gazette, as the case may be”. Strictly the substitution
would read “Official Gazette or in the Official Gazette, as the case may be, but the latter words have been omitted as being
redundant”.
78
(e) procedure where the defendant claims to be entitled to contribution or indemnity over against
any person whether a party to the suit or not;
(f) summary procedure—
(i) in suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable
by the defendant, with or without interest, arising—
on a contract express or implied; or
on an enactment where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the nature of
a debt other than a penalty; or
on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or a liquidated demand
only;
or on a trust; or
(ii) in suits for the recovery of immovable property, with or without a claim for rent or mesne profits,
by a landlord against a tenant whose term has expired or has been duly determined by notice to quit, or has
become liable to forefeiture for non-payment of rent, or against persons claiming under such tenant;
(g) procedure by way of originating summons;
(h) consolidation of suits, appeals and other proceedings;
(i) delegation to any Registrar, Prothonotary or Master or other official of the Court of any
judicial, quasi-judicial and non judicial duties; and
(j) all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be necessary or desirable for the
transaction of the business of Civil Courts.
Section 129. Power of High Courts to make rules as to their original Civil procedure.—Notwithstanding
anything in this Code, any High Court 1[not being the Court of a Judicial Commissioner] may make such
rules not inconsistent with the Letters Patent 2[or order] 3[or other law] establishing it to regulate its own
procedure in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction as it shall think fit, and nothing herein contained
shall affect the validity of any such rules in force at the commencement of this Code.
Section 130. Powers of other High Courts to make rules as to matters other than procedure.—A High
Court 5[not being a High Court to which section 129 applies] may, with the previous approval of the State
Government, make with respect to any matter other than procedure any rule which a High Court 6[for a
7*** State] might under 8[article 227 of the Constitution] make with respect to any such matter for any
part of the territories under its jurisdiction which is not included within the limits of a presidency town.]
Section 131. Publication of rules.—Rules made in accordance with section 129 or section 130 shall be
published in the 9[Official Gazette] and shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may
be specified have the force of law.
PART XI
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 132. Exemption of certain women from personal appearance.—(1) Women who, according to the
customs and manners of the country, ought not to be compelled to appear in public shall be exempt from
personal appearance in Court.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt such women from arrest in execution of civil
process in any case in which the arrest of women is not prohibited by this Code.
Section 133. Exemption of other persons.—10[(1) The following persons shall be entitled to exemption from
personal appearance in Court, namely:—
(i) the President of India;
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “for a Part A State or a Part B State”.
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.
3. Ins. by Act 2 of 1951, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1-4-1951).
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for section 130.
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “not constituted by His Majesty by Letters Patent”.
6. Subs., ibid., for “so constituted”.
7. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “section 224 of the Government of India Act, 1935”.
9. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for “Gazette of India or in the Local Official Gazette, as the case may be”. Strictly the substitution would read “Official
Gazette or in the Official Gazette, as the case may be,” but the latter words have been omitted as being redundant.
10. Subs. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 12, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
79
(ii) the Vice-President of India;
(iii) the Speaker of the House of the People;
(iv) the Ministers of the Union;
(v) the Judges of the Supreme Court;
(vi) the Governors of States and the administrators of Union territories;
(vii) the Speakers of the State Legislative Assemblies;
(viii) the Chairman of the State Legislative Councils;
(ix) the Ministers of States;
(x) the Judges of the High Courts; and
(xi) the persons to whom section 87B applies.]
1* * * * *
(3) Where any person 2*** claims the privilege of such exemption, and it is consequently necessary to
examine him by commission, he shall pay the costs of that commission, unless the party requiring his
evidence pays such costs.
Section 134. Arrest other than in execution of decree.—The provisions of sections 55, 57 and 59 shall
apply, so far as may be, to all persons arrested under this Code.
Section 135. Exemption from arrest under civil process.—(1) No Judge, Magistrate or other judicial officer
shall be liable to arrest under civil process while going to, presiding in, or returning from, his Court.
(2) Where any matter is pending before a tribunal having jurisdiction therein, or believing in good
faith that it has such jurisdiction, the parties thereto, their pleaders, mukhtars, revenue-agents and
recognized agents, and their witnesses acting in obedience to a summons, shall be exempt from arrest
under civil process other than process issued by such tribunal for contempt of Court while going to or
attending such tribunal for the purpose of such matter, and while returning from such tribunal.
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall enable a judgment-debtor to claim exemption from arrest under
an order for immediate execution or where such judgment-debtor attends to show cause why he should
not be committed to prison in execution of a decree.
3[135A. Exemption of members of legislative bodies from arrest and detention under civil
process.—4[(1) No person shall be liable to arrest or detention in prison under civil process—
(a) if he is a member of—
(i) either House of Parliament, or
(ii) the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State, or
(iii) a Legislative Assembly of a Union territory,
during the continuance of any meeting of such House of Parliament or, as the case may be, of the
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council;
(b) if he is a member of any committee of—
(i) either House of Parliament, or
(ii) the Legislative Assembly of a State or Union territory, or
(iii) the Legislative Council of a State,
during the continuance of any meeting of such committee;
(c) if he is a member of—
(i) either House of Parliament, or
(ii) a Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State having both such Houses, during
the continuance of a joint sitting, meeting, conference or joint committee of the Houses of
Parliament or, Houses of the State Legislature, as the case may be, and during the forty days before
and after such meeting, sitting or conference.]
1. Sub-section (2) omitted by Act 66 of 1956, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
2. The words “so exempted” omitted by s. 12, ibid.
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 1925, s. 3.
4. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 45, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
80
(2) A person released from detention under sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions, of the said
sub-section, be liable to re-arrest and to the further detention to which he would have been liable if he had
not been released under the provisions of sub-section (1).]
Section 136. Procedure where person to be arrested or property to be attached is outside district.—(1)
Where an application is made that any person shall be arrested or that any property shall be attached
under any provision of this Code not relating to the execution of decrees, and such person resides or such
property is situate outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court to which the application is made,
the Court may, in its discretion, issue a warrant of arrest of make an order of attachment, and send to the
District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such person or property resides or is situate a
copy of the warrant or order, together with the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment.
(2) The District Court shall, on receipt of such copy and amount, cause the arrest or attachment to be
made by its own officers, or by a Court subordinate to itself, and shall inform the Court which issued or
made such warrant or order of the arrest or attachment.
(3) The Court making an arrest under this section shall send the person arrested to the Court by which
the warrant of arrest was issued, unless he shows cause to the satisfaction of the former Court why he
should not be sent to the later Court, or unless he furnishes sufficient security for his appearance before
the later Court or for satisfying any decree that may be passed against him by that Court, in either of
which cases the Court making the arrest shall release him.
(4) Where a person to be arrested or movable property to be attached under this section is within the
local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Fort William in
Bengal or at Madras or at Bombay, 1*** the copy of the warrant of arrest or of the order of attachment,
and the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment, shall be sent to the Court of Small
Causes of Calcutta, Madras 2[or Bombay], as the case may be, and that Court, on receipt of the copy and
amount, shall proceed as if it were the District Court.
Section 137. Language of subordinate Courts.—(1) The language which, on the commencement of this
Code, is the language of any Court subordinate to a High Court shall continue to be the language of such
subordinate Court until the State Government otherwise directs.
(2) The State Government may declare what shall be the language of any such Court and in what
character applications to and proceedings in such Courts shall be written.
(3) Where this Court requires or allows anything other that the recording of evidence to be done in
writing in any such Court, such writing may be in English; but if any party or his pleader is unacquainted
with English a translation into the language of the Court shall, at his request, be supplied to him; and the
Court shall make such order as it thinks fit in respect of the payment of the costs of such translation.
STATE AMENDMENT
Rajasthan
Amendment of section 137, Central Act V of 1908.-In section 137 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(Central Act V of 1908), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Wherever this Code requires or allows anything other than the recording of evidence to be
done in writing in any such court, such writing shall be in Hindi in Devnagri Script with the interna-
tional form of Indian numerals :
Provided that the court may in its discretion accept such writing in English on the undertaking of
the party filing such writing, to file a Hindi translation of the same, within such time as may be
granted by the court and the opposite party shall have a right to have a copy of such writing in Hindi."
[Vide Rajasthan Act 7 of 1983, s. 2]
Section 138. Power of High Court to require evidence to be recorded in English.—(1) The 4[High
Court] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct with respect to any Judge specified in the
notification, or falling under a description set forth therein, that evidence in cases in which an appeal is
allowed shall be taken down by him in the English language and in manner prescribed.
(2) Where a Judge is prevented by any sufficient reason from complying with a direction under
sub-section (1), he shall record the reason and cause the evidence to be taken down in writing from his
dictation in open Court.
1. The words or “of the Chief Court of Lower Burma”, omitted by the A.O. 1937.
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Bombay or Rangoon”.
3. For s. 138, as applicable to Assam, see the Civil Procedure (Assam Amendment) Act 1941, (Assam 1 of 1941),
s. 2.
4. Subs. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule, Pt. I, for “L.G.”.
81
Section 139. Oath on affidavit by whom to be administered.—In the case of any affidavit under this Code—
(a) any Court or Magistrate, or
1[(aa) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952); or]
(b) any officer or other person whom a High Court may appoint in this behalf, or
(c) any officer appointed by any other Court which the State Government has generally or
specially empowered in this behalf,
may administer the oath to the deponent.
STATE AMENDMENT
Uttar Pradesh
Amendment of section 139 of Act no. 5 of 1908.— In section 139 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, for clauses (b) and (c), the following shall be substituted and be
deemed always to have been substituted, namely :—
“(b) any person appointed in this behalf by a High Court or by a District Court ; or
(c) any person appointed in this behalf by such other Court as the State Government may, by
general or special order, empower in this behalf” ;
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 11 of 1981, s. 2]
Section 140. Assessors in causes of salvage, etc.—(1) In any admiralty or vice-admiralty cause of salvage to
wage or collision the Court, whether it be exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction, may, if it
thinks fit, and shall upon request of either party to such cause, summon to its assistance, in such manner as
it may direct or as may be prescribed, two competent assessors; and such assessors shall attend and assist
accordingly.
(2) Every such assessor shall receive such fees for his attendance, to be paid by such of the parties
as the Court may direct or as may be prescribed.
Section 141. Miscellaneous proceedings.—The procedure provided in this Code in regard to suits shall be
followed, as far as it can be made applicable, in all proceedings in any Court of civil jurisdiction.
2[Explanation.—In this section, the expression “proceedings” includes proceedings under Order
IX, but does not include any proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution.]
Section 142. Orders and notices to be in writing.—All orders and notices served on or given to any
person under the provisions of this Code shall be in writing.
Section 143. Postage.—Postage, where chargeable on a notice, summons or letter issued under this Code
and forwarded by post, and the fee for registering the same, shall be paid within a time to be fixed
before the communication is made:
Provided that the State Government 3*** may remit such postage, or fee, or both, or may prescribe
a scale of court-fees to be levied in lieu thereof.
Section 144. Application for restitution.—(1) Where and in so far as a decree 4[or an order] is 5[varied or
reversed in any appeal, revision or other proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit instituted for the
purpose, the Court which passed the decree or order] shall, on the application of any party entitled to any
benefit by way of restitution or otherwise, cause such restitution to be made as will, so far as may be, place
the parties in the position which they would have occupied but for such decree 4[or order] or 6[such part
thereof as has been varied, reversed, set aside or modified]; and for this purpose, the Court may make any
orders, including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of interest, damages, compensation and
mesne profits, which are properly 7[consequential on such variation, reversal, setting aside or modification
of the decree or order].
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 46 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Ins. by s. 47, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G, in C.” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Sch. I, Pt. I
4. Ins. by Act 66 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1-1-1957).
5. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 48, for “varied or reversed, the Court of first instance” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
6. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for “such part thereof as has been varied or reversed” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
7. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for “consequential on such variation or reversal” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
82
1[Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression “Court which passed the decree or
order” shall be deemed to include,—
(a) where the decree or order has been varied or reversed in exercise of appellate or revisional
jurisdiction, the Court of first instance;
(b) where the decree or order has been set aside by a separate suit, the Court of first instance
which passed such decree or order;
(c) where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or has ceased to have jurisdiction to execute, it,
the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree or order was passed were instituted at the time of making
the application for restitution under this section, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.]
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any restitution or other relief which could
be obtained by application under sub-section (1).
Section 145. Enforcement of liability of surety.—Where any person 2[has furnished security or given a
guarantee]—
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part thereof, or
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree, or
(c) for the payment of any money, or for the fulfilment of any condition imposed on any person,
under an order of the Court in any suit or in any proceeding consequent thereon,
3[the decree or order may be executed in the manner therein provided for the execution of decrees,
namely:—
(i) if he has rendered himself personally liable, against him to that extent;
(ii) if he has furnished any property as security, by sale of such property to the extent of the
security;
(iii) if the case falls both under clauses (i) and (ii) then to the extent specified in those clauses,
and such person shall, be deemed to be a party within the meaning of section 47:]
Provided that such notice as the Court in each case thinks sufficient has been given to the surety.
Section 146. Proceedings by or against representatives.—Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by
any law for the time being in force, where any proceeding may be taken or application made by or against
any person then the proceeding may be taken or the application may be made by or against any person
claiming under him.
Section 147. Consent or agreement by persons under disability.—In all suits to which any person under
disability is a party, any consent or agreement, as to any proceeding shall, if given or made with the
express leave of the Court by the next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect as if
such person, were under no disability and had given such consent or made such agreement.
Section 148. Enlargement of time.—Where any period is fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act
prescribed or allowed by this Code, the Court may, in its discretion, from time to time, enlarge such period,
4[not exceeding thirty days in total,] even though the period originally fixed or granted may have expired.
Section 148A. Right to lodge a caveat.—(1) Where an application is expected to be made, or has been
made, in a suit or proceeding instituted, or about to be instituted, in a Court, any person claiming a right
to appear before the Court on the hearing of such application may lodge a caveat in respect thereof.
(2) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub-section (1), the person by whom the caveat has been
lodged (hereinafter referred to as the caveator) shall serve a notice of the caveat by 6[speed post with
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 49, ibid., for “has become liable as surety” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by s. 49, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1-7-2002).
5. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f. 1-5-1977).
6. Ins. by Act 37 of 2025, s. 3 and Sch. II, for “registered post, acknowledgement due” (w.e.f. 20-12-25).
83
registration and proof of delivery], on the person by whom the application has been, or is expected to be,
made, under sub-section (1).
(3) Where, after a caveat has been lodged under sub-section (1), any application is filed in any suit or
proceeding, the Court, shall serve a notice of the application on the caveator.
(4) Where a notice of any caveat has been served on the applicant, he shall forthwith furnish the
caveator at the caveator’s expense, with a copy of the application made by him and also with copies of
any paper or document which has been, or may be, filed by him in support of the application.
(5) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub-section (1), such caveat shall not remain in force after
the expiry of ninety days from the date on which it was lodged unless the application referred to in
sub-section (1) has been made before the expiry of the said period.]
Section 149. Power to make up deficiency of court-fees.—Where the whole or any part of any fee prescribed for
any document by the law for the time being in force relating to court-fees has not been paid, the Court may, in
its discretion, at any stage, allow the person, by whom such fee is payable, to pay the whole or part, as the case
may be, of such court-fee; and upon such payment the document, in respect of which fee is payable, shall have
the same force and effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.
Section 150. Transfer of business.—Save as otherwise provided, where the business of any Court is transferred to
any other Court, the Court to which the business is so transferred shall have the same powers and shall perform
the same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Code upon the Court from which
the business was so transferred.
Section 151. Saving of inherent powers of Court.—Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or
otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of
justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Court.
Section 152. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders.—Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in
judgments, decrees or orders or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any
time be corrected by the Court either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.
Section 153. General power to amend.—The Court may at any time, and on such terms as to costs or otherwise as
it may think fit, amend any defect or error in any proceeding in a suit; and all necessary amendments shall be
made for the purpose of determining the real question or issue raised by or depending on such proceeding.
Section 153A. Power to amend decree or order where appeal is summarily dismissed.—Where an Appellate
Court dismisses an appeal under rule 11 of Order XLI, the power of the Court to amend, under section 152, the
decree or order appealed against may be exercised by the Court which had passed the decree or order in the
first instance, notwithstanding that the dismissal of the appeal has the effect of confirming the decree or order,
as the case may be, passed by the Court of first instance.
Section 153B. Place of trial to be deemed to be open Court.—The place in which any Civil Court is held
for the purpose of trying any suit shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public generally may
have access so far as the same can conveniently contain them:
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into or trial of
any particular case, that the public generally, or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be or
remain in, the room or building used by the Court.]
154. [Saving of present right of appeal.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (48 of 1952),
s. 2 and Sch. I.
155. [Amendment of certain Acts.] Rep. by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid.
156. [Repeals.] Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (17 of 1914), s. 3 and Sch. II.
Section 157. Continuance of orders under repealed enactments.—Notifications published, declarations
and rules made, places appointed, agreements filed, scales prescribed, forms framed, appointments made
and powers conferred under Act VIII of 1859 or under any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending
the same or under any other enactment hereby repealed shall, so far as they are consistent with this Code,
have the same force and effect as if they had been respectively published, made, appointed, filed,
prescribed, framed and conferred under this Code and by the authority empowered thereby in such behalf.
1. Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 51 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
84
Section 158. Reference to Code of Civil Procedure and other repealed enactments.—In every enactment
or notification passed or issued before the commencement of this Code in which reference is made to or
to any Chapter or section of Act VIII of 1859 or any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending the
same or any other enactment hereby repealed, such reference shall, so far as may be practicable, be taken
to be made to this Code or to its corresponding Part, Order, section or rule.
______
85
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
